Hello, world. What is up? Welcome to the Feelings Lab. I'm your host, Matt Forte, and on today's episode, we're tackling the joy, nostalgia, sadness, anxiety, awe, and euphoria that comes all together but once a year. That's right. It's the Feelings Lab Holiday Edition with special guest Jason Silva. Oh, man, the holidays, Christmas, Hanukkah, Kwanzaa, Winter Solstice, Boxing Day, Festivus, whatever you observe. Year after year, the month of December refuses to go quietly. Now, granted for some, it's a peaceful time of reflection, gathering with loved ones, engaging in the generous exchange of beautifully wrapped tokens of appreciation. For the rest of us, there's a laundry list of social obligations, the stress of finding just the right gifts without spending too much or too little, your friend's Christmas party, your friend's Hanukkah party, your office's holiday party. God help you if you're the one hosting your family's festivities. Where's everybody going to sleep? Do you have enough towels? Can't they bring their own towels? How am I going to wash all these towels? The towel thing, a very real conversation in my house, by the way. You want to hear the craziest part? Might be hard to believe, but this is actually one of my favorite times of the year, which is precisely why I'm so excited to end this year and our first season with this episode. People often say the holidays can be an emotional roller coaster. I disagree. Roller coasters suggest there's peaks and valleys. For whatever reason, as we get closer and closer to the culmination of all these rituals and celebrations, everything starts to run at 11. And again, I'm not a cynic. I love this time of year. It just can be a lot. And for all the stupid stuff I'm half complaining about, I also recognize that I am super lucky to have happy family memories from my childhood. It's not the case for everybody. The holidays for a lot of people can also trigger a deeper anxiety and depression than the superficial self-imposed stress I get over gift exchanges and towel logistics. At the end of the day, we are a podcast about emotions. And in my experience, there is no time of year more jam-packed with heightened emotion than this holiday season. So with that being said, let's rip the paper off this bad boy and open this gift up.
One of the things I've been most grateful for this year are the new friendships formed through making this show and the incredible insight and perspective my co-hosts and guests have brought with them. Joining me now, as always, my new best buds, Dr. Alan Cowen and Dr. Decker Keltner here. Gentlemen, thank you for being with me once again. And speaking of friends with incredible inspite and perspective, oh my God, I couldn't be more excited about this guest if we had booked Santa Claus himself. He's an Emmy nominated and world renowned TV personality, storyteller, filmmaker, and sought after keynote speaker and futurist. We know him from hosting five seasons of the Emmy nominated global hit TV series Brain Games on the National Geographic channel. His immensely popular YouTube channel Shots of Awe is one of my personal favorites. Presenting us with the greatest gift of all is time. Please welcome to the show, the great Jason Silva is here. Jason, my goodness, look at you, sir. Thanks for being here. How are you doing, man? Oh, I'm well. Thank you so much for inviting me on. I'm excited to be here with all of you for what I'm sure will be a delightful and inspiring conversation. So thank you. Oh, that means a lot, man. And that's what we aim for. But it truly, it means a lot to get you on the show with us. We're very excited. This is going to be a good time. I want to dive right in, gentlemen, you know, as evidenced by my intro, I obviously have a complicated relationship with the holidays, which is not entirely uncommon, but it's different for everybody. So I'm curious for each of you what your relationship is like with this time of year. Do you love it? Do you dread it? Is it complicated? I want to go around the room. But Jason, let's start with you traditionally, sir. What does this time of year feel like for you at the Silva household? Sure. Well, as a kid, you know, the December holidays were very exciting, obviously, because growing up in for me, at least in Venezuela, it meant that we were going to go to the US, usually a place like Miami, and there was going to be shopping and gifts and just abundance and vacation. And so for all those usual reasons, it was really, really great. But eventually, I developed a sort of bittersweet relationship with New Year's specifically more than Christmas or Hanukkah. I come from a Jewish household, but in any case, New Year's, the song, Old Lang Syne, I always thought was sort of the epitome of the happy sad, what director Cameron Crowe calls the happy sad or the bittersweet.
And even though I didn't really understand the lyrics to the song, emotionally, it felt like a song where we were celebrating those people we love, but with this shadow being cast of everything is fleeting and everything is transient. And maybe it was because I would always see like my mom or my grandma like get welled up when they said Happy New Year. And it was, I think, because the joy and the angst related to the passing of another year goes right to the heart of what for me is death anxiety, or the anxiety of mortality and of transience in general. And so it's ironic, right, that when we are reminded that time is fleeting, we want to hug the ones we love more because we love them, even though there's this tinge of sadness that no matter how much we squeeze, we can't stop the passing of time. You know, it reminds me of a line that was recited by the Ethan Hawke character in the film before sunrise. And if you've seen that wonderful cult classic film, but it's about two people who fall in love on a train, they spend the night in Vienna. And it's a dreamlike atmosphere, but it's haunted by the fact that it is a passing moment. And towards the end of the film, he recites to her a poem by W.H. Auden, when he says, And all the clocks in the city began to whirr and chime. Oh, let not time deceive you. You cannot conquer time. In headaches and in worries, vaguely, life leaks away, and time will have its fancy tomorrow or today. And so it just, to me, it just hits at the worm, at the worm at the core of the human condition and the human situation. And even with all that turbulent angst associated with those feelings of transience, I still am kind of a masochist in that I love Auld Lang Syne. I still want to go there. For sure. Because I want to feel those things intensely. I want to, yeah. So that's what comes to mind. It's phenomenal that you open with that. And first of all, thank you for sharing that story. You're welcome. Because one of the things that I really wanted to dig into, and Alan and Dec,
You're not off the hook. We're going to come around to you guys and how you feel in a little bit. But this is just an incredible segue here is just literally the other day, very similar experience. I was in the car with my wife and I forget which song came on, it was an old Christmas song. And we kind of sat in mutual silence just for a bit and I started to well up and I realized she was having a similar reaction. And we were both thinking of different moments in our past, but we were doing the exact same thing. We were visiting these memories and experiencing them at the same time. And there was a joy for a moment. And then we were both choked up because of the sadness and the grief over the fleetingness, the reality that that moment is gone. It's done. That happened. That's not coming back. And there's something there that I think it's more messy than just nostalgia, unless I'm wrong. And that is nostalgia. And I don't realize that I've hit the nail on the head, but I feel like, you know what I mean? Like it's a little bit more of everything. Yeah. It's nostalgia. And I think in accurate ways, it's how Cameron Crowe, the director, describes it as the happy sad. It's another way of saying the bittersweet, you know? And Alan de Botton, the British philosopher, he'll say, we don't cry when something is sad. We cry when something is more beautiful than we expected it to be. And to that end, sometimes the awareness or the contemplation of the fleeting nature of something reminds you that just being surrounded by people you love is more beautiful than we ever take the time to really contemplate. And so, in a sense, we are crying because we're so moved for the good graces we've been given. And also for the fact that everything passes. You know, another great filmic example would be the end of Harry Met Sally. You know, another classic film that I often watch during the holiday and the very last scene, of course, Auld Lang Syne is playing. Harry runs to the party and, you know, he says, you know, you're the first thing I think of when I wake up in the morning. You're the last person I want to talk to when I go to sleep at night. And it's not because I'm lonely and it's not because it's New Year's, but it's because when you realize you want to spend the rest of your life with someone, you want the rest of your life to start as soon as possible. And then she cries. I cry. We all cry. Yeah, everybody cries. Spectacular.
This is where science is really useful because it adds this other layer of understanding. We often think of tears as you know, like Jason was saying, oh, it's about sadness, but it actually is much deeper and there's this great analysis of tears by Lutz showing that it really is about when you recognize the sacred that is fleeting, right? And at the holidays, a lot of us are going to be tearing up for reasons we don't quite understand because it's like, wow, I had this childhood experiences of a family and that's changing, and now I'm at this stage of my life and kind of why we gather is meaning different things. So, I love Jason's story because it connects us to this really interesting kind of the kind of work that Alan does of like taking a concept tears, but really finding the deeper nuances to them and one branch of the tears are these sacred tears that I think holidays get us close to, yeah. Yeah. Oh, I love them because I think again, they serve cathartic function, they resolve dissonance, you know, they relieve stress, but they also allow us to digest our grief or metabolize our grief. And Jamie Wheal says we're all choking on undigested grief. And sometimes these spaces, these holidays, these rituals, they provide a kind of dramatic opportunity for catharsis through like the creation of aesthetic distance, you know, like the song creates a space holding for the processing of these emotions. A film can do the same thing. I think of the film, let's say, Love Actually, the end sequence of Love Actually at the airport when the Beach Boys God Only Knows is playing one of the greatest songs of all time. And all the characters in the film appear and everybody is sort of, you know, has been redeemed and has found love. But then that song is God Only Knows What I Do Without You, which is exactly the same as Auld Lang Syne. It's realizing how much I love you and what God only knows what I do without you. But that again, that's I think a healthy way to metabolize the grief inherent to the human condition, the agony and the ecstasy as they say. And it's a fantastic example. Another film, The End of Love.
The end of La La Land, you know, that entire like microfilm within a film that appears at the end where they both imagine the entire story of their lives. If things happen a little bit differently, what might have been, what could have been, what should have been, I mean, the epitome of the bittersweet, you know, and it's just like, for me, you know, some might think like, why are you going there? Why are you sitting there with sepia toned photographs, like crying yourself to sleep? And I'm like, well, because I'm cleansing, man. Like I'm cleaning, I'm cleansing it. There's, there's discharge. Yeah. And catharsis is huge. It's huge. For sure. A spoiler alert for La La Land, but I think you should have seen it by now. Alan, I'd love to throw over to you for a second, because as Dacher mentioned with sort of the nuances within just like the tears that can mean different things, we never got a chance this season to do a full episode on nostalgia. I'm curious as powerful as it is, where does it sit in the map and what are sort of its neighbors and what's it nestled next to and sort of cohabitating with over there on the emotions map? Nostalgia is kind of an island off on its own. It doesn't really connect directly to anything kind of close to aesthetic appreciation and transmit awe, but it's definitely its own thing. And I think that's because it's many things. It is this feeling that you're stepping backward into your old self and it feels different, but it feels reminiscent, right? It's a state of mind you inhabit that you haven't inhabited in a long time. And so it's like you're visiting your childhood home, but in your own brain. And it's because of ritual, the fact that you haven't visited this part of your brain in a very long time, literally. Like these exact pattern of neurons hasn't been active in a while. And the last time it was, it was the last time it was the same holiday. And you're able to actually step backward in time. Almost in a literal sense. And my holiday is Thanksgiving. That's when that happens to me. My family has a huge Thanksgiving on my dad's side. It's like 30 people all in the same house. And there are very strong rituals around it. Even though it's not a religious holiday, there's a drumming part of it. There's a guitar, there's dancing. Yeah, it's crazy.
Wait, elaborate. What is it just like a just everybody gets lost in the vibe? Is there a repertoire? Do you all know the songs and practice before? I want to hear everything you can tell me about this. This is fantastic. This is, this is, yeah. It's interesting that you that you mentioned Thanksgiving, because, you know, cognitively, the concept is beautiful, right? It's a day of gratitude. It's a day of giving thanks. And, and, and so for me, I would think that I would find that same resonance, but I think my triggers tend to be like, for example, I think New Year's everything I've said about it is true. But I think that the real thing that takes my buttons is the melodic orchestration of old Lang Syne. I think if there was no old Lang Syne, it might not happen to me in the same way. And there's, there's an orientation around aesthetics. I think I'm reminded, for example, high school graduations when they play the pomp and circumstance march, same thing. There's something about that. Oh God, it's like, it's like, it's just emotionally like crack because it's, it's, it's acknowledging what has passed and it's closure. But it's mediated emotionally for me by the aesthetic, by the aesthetic work. And it's funny because I can't think of a song that we play on Thanksgiving. And so usually I haven't, I don't have memories associated with Thanksgiving. I'm just like, oh, everything's closed. I think it's just the smell more for me. Like, I think being in the room with the kind of cranberry sauce, turkey, like whatever smells, that's really reminiscent. And the, and the kind of the sound of the people chattering is very distinct. And it sounds like Thanksgiving, like you could probably play that sound. It could be in a different language and I would know there was Thanksgiving. I love that. Yeah. I absolutely love that. Dakar, how about you, man? Any drum circles? What's your, what's your holiday situation looking like over by you? How do you feel this time of year? Oh, well, you know, I think this is why, um, you know, I was, uh, I think, um, for me, um,
The sounds and scents and sights of the holidays are like for Jason, kind of this reminder of what's possible in the imagination, what didn't happen and what I wish for. It's this really complicated mixture. I was raised by two parents who were kind of romantics, a literature professor and an artist and kind of this vision, late 60s hippies, like you know, we're all going to be part of this harmonious community and those never worked out. And so, the holidays is really about kind of grappling with you know, what are we as a collective? What is my family as a collective and things that I miss and things that are right there in front of me. And you know, I love the nostalgia. Sometimes it's the joy I get on a holiday is like I had that moment as a kid, my daughters are getting that. That's all we have, you know, it's always changing. And so, it's like a lot of times of being together, it's complicated and has the kind of the anxieties and the joys mixed in. For sure. Something that we're kind of tiptoeing around and touching on and mentioning here, I want to go right for and I'll get to it, bear with me here. But Jason, I caught a bit of your Insta story yesterday and you were talking about being on a ship and staring into the vastness of the open sea and how that can really evoke a sense of the reality of the scale of the universe within which we exist. And I have to imagine there's a sense of awe that comes with that contemplation. And so, I'm curious, are there, I mean, you mentioned Adelstein, are there rituals or recurring moments this time of year that trigger off for you? And is it a different flavor of awe than you may experience throughout the year? Yeah, definitely. I think there's an opportunity for true contemplation because the rituals surrounding the holidays encourage it. So, people who are not prone to such reflection, people who are maybe busy by everyday life, you know, I have the luxury that in a sense, what I do for a living invites me to spend time in these contemplative
I know that the holidays give an excuse for that to scale. More people can be included on that. More people are willing to take a gamble and take a trip and go on an adventure and plan something special and put more resources into evoking sacred space and sacred time. To go from Kronos to Kairos, as the Greeks talk about that switch from time focused to time free, from time centered to timeless. I tend to seek out around that time. I tend to want to be in nature. I tend to want to be in open landscapes and open horizons so I can take stock of my life and take stock of the year and the whole idea of the New Year's resolution to set new goals. But it's also this temporary suspension of time. It's this liminal zone as the year ends and before the new one begins and before all the new projects start and all the new emails start. So, it gives this nice liminal space that can be, I think, harnessed for just adventure and play. And that's really important to me. You know, the other... I mean, for me, it's such a neat question, Matt. And for me, having moved around a bit, but the awe of the holidays is temporal. It's about time. And it has this... And I think it's interesting, Jason, to think about the nostalgia of time, how going forward is sort of exhilarating, but going back is sad. And man, holidays for me, I think about my great-grandfather lived to his 99. He had dementia for 30 years, just spoke his own language and how he was part of it and my daughters are part of it. Just all these generations mixed in and then you look at an ornament on a tree or whatever you're looking at and you're like, man, you know, time is... Time moves us forward and it has all these mysteries in it. So, for me, it's time to think about. Yeah. That's amazing. That's well said. I think that you can't help but contemplate the passing of time. And after I grieved for the past...
feel an intense desire to go into the timeless present. It's like, okay, I've grieved for the past. Now I want to go into a suspended state of the deep now. Like, let me go like make new memories. But like by losing myself in the present moment, there's a desire for what has been described as heightened qualitative intensity, which is deep. Ah, you know, deep, deep sacred now. Yeah, because also because it's like, otherwise, I'll stay grieving indefinitely. And I don't want that either. Well, there's my question, right? Is how do you and maybe hard to pinpoint this, but how do you know when you've grieved time enough? How do you because I feel like a lot of my adulthood anxiety around the holidays comes from maybe I don't know that I have grieved enough. And therefore, I'm constantly chasing that wonder that I had when I was a kid. I know I'm never going to get it, but I'm going for it. And not just for me, but I have anxiety, I want to make sure that I'm making that happen for those around me, you know, so and I wonder if I'm chasing that, because I haven't allowed myself to grieve enough the the passage. How do you know when you're ready to, to make that leap and say, Alright, I've, I've spent my time there. Now, I want to be here. I want to be present. Yeah. I mean, I think once once some tears have been shed, I think physiologically, that's the marker of reconciliation or catharsis. Like if tears haven't been shed, you haven't grieved. But I typically find that I don't grieve for so long. I mean, I like the feeling when the tears come and you don't want to break the concentration either, because it's a space you're in, you know, and if you're interrupted, it's like you're interrupting the process. But once you kind of undergo and you get a good cry in, then there's for me, at least then there's a doubling down in like making this count, you know, there's the, I will not go quietly into that good night, I will rage against the dying of the light with more play and more wonder and more deep now like, because what I don't want is the sadness to then culminate in me thinking, Oh, my best days are behind. Like, absolutely not. Like, I will not accept that thesis. My best days are not behind me. I'm just getting started. And my sense of awe and my sense of wonder.
started. And that's where I just like refuse the sort of fatalistic impulse to just say like, Oh, you know, I peeked and all the golden days that are gone. No way. It's pretty amazing. Alan, I see you're nodding your head. You either agree or you have a contribution. You know, besides just sort of running out of time, in the sense of time passing, and you sort of there's a meter and you kind of get to the end and you see it coming, I think that the holidays, I think they mean something very different to children, for example. And there's a hopefulness in that that you can revisit every time. Which also sort of puts things into perspective, in the same way that you know, there's a ritual to just every cycle in our lives of the week, weekend, every time we get to the weekend, it's like, you have a feeling every time you're getting ready for, like the week to start on Monday, there's a certain feeling of time passing, that kind of cyclical sense. There's like a monthly rhythm, which is not really as important. But with the holidays align us to a seasonal rhythm, that I think taps into something very biological and very primal. And remind us that this long view has to do with, you know, at least if you're in the normal Northern Hemisphere, and it's the winter, it has to do with sort of reflecting on everything that you've kind of brought together, and everyone kind of huddling in a room, you know, family getting together for the winter, you've sort of, you know, food preserves, you're just kind of relaxing, there's not much to do, you don't want to go out and expose yourself to weather. I think there's something very primal that that holiday sits on top of that actually is part of our biology, that we can also talk about. Well, that's, that's fascinating, because I'm thinking about exactly that. While I'm listening to you guys, because I, you know, doing some research for this, and just every year, you learn a little bit more about the holidays, and you did the year past. And one of the things I was like, Oh, wow. So like, Christmas, as we know it, up until like the late 18th, 18th century or 18. I can't remember. But it was like, for a while, it was debauchery. It wasn't anything like this. It was up. So I'm like, Okay, so when
Because we need this annual catharsis. This sounds like, let's take the holidays out of it for a second. All the things we're talking about just sound like really important steps to go through and like the human experience. And so, I'm wondering prior to the garland and the specials and the animated reindeer and all that, was this a pattern that we had where we like once a year, we all kind of took stock of things and we all appreciated what we had? And that might be a question outside of the scope of this podcast, but I was wondering, to hear you say that we're aligned with all these things, it's fascinating to me, that this is just something, it's a rhythm that we're already kind of in, we're predisposed for. Well, clearly, you know, I mean, you know, and we can't forget like the seasons are changing during the winter holidays, the light is changing, temperature is changing in the anthropological study of food celebrations, which is one of the oldest kinds of celebration upon which culture builds out of probably certain kinds of religions. You would grow your hams, you know, wherever you were in, you know, New Guinea or the like. Harvest would come, you'd have a week of food sharing, gratitude, ritual, music, dance, you know. And so, I think Alan's onto something that we should be thinking about, which is there are these kind of earlier predecessors to these moments that bring us together in these holidays. Or for sure, like when the fruits would yield, like the farming would yield, you know, like it was all tied, I think, to like our early, yeah, civilizational, cyclical, like when the fruits would yield, that was also like fertility, right? It was associated with fertility, you know, like it was, I think it was a whole thing there for sure. Yeah. I mean, depending on what part of the world you're in, there might be different kinds of things you have to do, but there's this entry point into a new stage every year. This is the stage where we have to do X, Y. I mean, even it's more primal than I think humans, if you look at like hibernation and bears and sort of like when the albatross couples meet up and there's penguins, you know, their seasonality and migration and when they hunt versus when they just huddle together during the winter, like at the beginning of all...
All of those things is this acknowledgment that we are shifting from one part of this big cycle to another. And for humans, I think there's a lot of interesting thoughts that are put into how we kind of plan that cyclicality out. Yeah. Well, it's interesting because not, I mean, like as evidenced by the room around me, I obviously, like I said, love this time of year, but that is not the case for everybody. You know, there are a ton of people with totally valid reasons to kind of reject the entire concept hunkered down until January. Pardon me. You know, and one of the more popular myths, which, and I cannot stress enough, is not true, is that suicides go up this time of year. And again, that is not the case, but people are inclined to believe it because people do feel depressed, they feel stressed, they feel lonely. And so that begs the question to me, like, why do we think for this three to four week period out of the year, every emotion, good or bad, gets amplified and feels cranked all the way up? You know, what is that evolutionarily speaking? Why are we doing that every once a year? You know, what do we, what do we think smart people? I think there's this, there's a sense that, uh, if you're not in the mood for whatever, you're not feeling good, but then everybody's having a great time. Everybody's dancing. It kind of irks you more, right? Like the more merry they are, the more that the difference, you know, the dissonance between the merriness and your sort of day to day dreariness is augmented. Like, you know, like misery loves company. And, and it just, it's that much more annoying, I suspect, you know what I mean? Billy Chris said it in when Harry Met Sally, as a single person, he's like, every year, I just want to get from the week before Thanksgiving to the week after New Year's. And so it's, it's, it's, I can see why that makes sense. And I also think that people who are just cynical of festivity in general as a capitalist trap, right? It's just like, ah, this is just like an excuse to sell us crap and so on and so forth. I hate it. But then I just feel like that's just choosing to like make a whole story out of one tiny detail. Yes. People go shopping during the holidays, but I don't think that's, I don't think it's a capitalist invention. It doesn't feel like the conspiracy for me, but some people feel that way. Well, it's all part of the big machine too. Right. Because like.
I'm going to start with Scrooge because if you talk about catharsis, if you see the Bill Murray version of Scrooge, his speech at the end is another fantastic holiday cathartic ending when he has this realization about what's important and love and opportunities missed that he's not going to miss anymore and how much he loves his brother and he's crying and of course we're crying and he's having that catharsis. But for me, catharsis is like the key thing here. I'm reading this wonderful book by a guy called Thomas Schafe called Drama, Ritual and Catharsis. And so his whole thing is that the concept of aesthetic distance is crucial to the healthy processing of emotion and catharsis. He says in terms of his theory of emotion is if you're under distanced from emotion, you have hysteria, absolute hysteria. And if you're over distanced, you have repression, you know, you're checked out, you're disassociated, right? But he says aesthetic distance is the Goldilocks zone. It is the perfect safe space where we can work through our own stuff under the guise of, oh, it's just a really sad movie. It's not just a really sad movie. The film is a medium by which you're working out your own sadness. Same with a scary movie. Same with a beautiful painting, weeping in front of a painting, reading a beautiful poem. Oh, that poem is so sad. Well, is the poem sad or was the poem a way for you to act out and articulate your own pain and your own grief? And I think he's just spot on, you know, like I fell in love with this guy, Thomas Shave, Drama, Catharsis and Ritual. And I'm 100% on board with that idea of aesthetic distance. Yeah. Sure, for sure.
Well, I think, you know, I think healthy, like, you know, to Alan's point earlier and it builds on what Jason is saying, which is that a lot of these collective experiences and that's the big shift we've been talking about in this series of like, we go from individual emotions to these incredible collective emotions, ecstasy, bliss, awe, which Jason has talked about. They happen in these effervescent patterns of behavior with multiple people and we try our best to build contexts that give us those emotions. You know, you go to a sporting event, a concert, a dance festival and holidays when they work, I've never thought about this, Jason, give us this like, I have a little bit of distance here to take this all in, you know, that Christmas tree is beautiful, the Hanukkah candles, so let's hope. Well, the reason we hate on streets too, I think is because like part of the experience is everybody experiencing something together. And so, it's kind of like, you know, when someone refuses to engage, it sort of, I don't want to say reduces their own experience, but there's a failure of this ritual to bring about that experience. Right. Yeah. I'm going to read you a quote from the Thomas Shape book. He says, he said, yeah. So he says, based on years of research into what he termed lay therapy or informal group therapies as well as Gestalt therapy, Shafe came to believe that drama and other performative rituals had an innate ability to relieve anxiety, affecting the particular emotional and aesthetic phenomenon of catharsis. When an audience or psychiatric patients were afforded an aesthetic distance, they could be guided through the drama to safely process accumulated or repressed anxiety without becoming overwhelmed. At aesthetic distance, the members of the audience can be core participants in a ritual become emotionally involved in the drama or ritual, but not to the point where they forget that they are also observers. Aesthetic distance may be defined as the simultaneous and equal experience of being both participant and observer. So aesthetic distance afforded a social group, a way to confront from a.
It focuses on the position of safety, the original experience or imagined scenario that caused them pain and anxiety, and then with narrative closure, a way to release that anxiety. The process relied on there being a structured setup, ritual, that facilitated the experience and a group of people with whom to share it. In Scheff's schema, the process was essentially a communal one, focused on shared anxiety. To put it, I propose a theory of ritual and it's associated myth as dramatic forms for coping with universal emotional distress. That's it. Wow. So you're like, Get the eggnog. Powerful. Let's start singing some carols, man. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That makes so much sense. Totally. And that's why I also think like things like, like improv, like improv theater, you know, when you bring this idea, not just of ritual, but also dramatic context that within that space, you can sort of act out your inner life in this aesthetic domain, you know, protected from the consequences of the real world. And so like safe space, this term like space holding applies the context of the holiday, you know, is a space holdings context. It's a sacred space and it's a place where potentially you can have a confessional moment, have a moment of emotional vulnerability because it's context dependent, right? Yeah. It provides safe context. I just think that's something that a lot of people think about. It's just the need for safe psychological space to act out and articulate and speak out our inner demons and our inner life and in doing so resolve anxiety and digest our grief. Yeah. I love that. And it's kind of, well, it's the flip side of the coin. One of the things I wanted, there's a ritual that brings me, it's the opposite effect. It brings me great anxiety and I touched on in the intro, it's the gift exchange. And I wanted to bring it up just because of how it is so much. For me, it's the other side. There's so many emotions packed into this ritual. There's the anxiety of like, oh, I've got to get all these people something and can I afford it? And then there's the excitement of like, oh, well, I got it, but I can't wait for them to open it. But then I have doubt and fear of like, well, what if?
If they don't like it, and then I got them something they don't have, and they don't think I know them as a person, but then they open it and then I feel pride. I feel relieved. I'm like, oh, good. They do like the thing. I am a good friend. I do understand them. But like, also, if you're receiving the gift, maybe this is me. There's a performative aspect of like, oh, this is great. This is exactly what I needed. More socks. And just like as a ritual, I was going to say, is there any other social construct that crams so many emotions into just one thing? It's so it's such that I will say that is a roller coaster for me because I'm all over with that point. That also could just be my personal anxiety about things that might not be universal, but out in the world. Is there anything comparable to that where we have a ritual that ultimately we stick the landing and we do it every year, but throughout it, it's challenging. It's difficult. It pushes us in weird directions. What scientists, how broken am I? I think that's one of the harder, particularly when it becomes commodified, like that part of the ritual actually gets in the way. And like people trying to kind of make that about about buying things gets in the way because, you know, not everybody has money or people don't necessarily want more things off Amazon. So I think I think there's I think we have a sort of the idealization of the ritual, butting against sort of the way it plays out, especially if it's not done well. But if you're asking me, is there I think another one is Valentine's Day, New Year's is another one. So they're all centered around holidays. They're all we've all created these parties. When I take a friend, when I take a friend to a new restaurant, I love introducing friends to restaurants that I really like specific about, like certain places that I adore. And then when I take them, I want them to absolutely love it. Or if I just give them any kind of experience, I want to know if they're having a good time. Like, are you good? Like, are you having fun? Like, are you glad you came? Like, do you wish it didn't come? Exactly. I think it comes from a place of I want to share. I'm doing this thing and I'm giving this person this thing because I have a positive memory relationship or connection to it, and I want them.
And if you are a student, you have to have that too. And if they don't, it's my fault. And now I've wasted their time. Like that's how I process it. Or then you wish you didn't bring them. Yeah, exactly. Because it's like I want to bring you but I only want to bring you if it's going to be good vibes. I want to bring you and bring you back. Yeah, because then you don't want to then tarnish. Yeah, exactly. Takes it away from you. Well, Matt, most rituals are hit or miss. I mean, let's be honest. Junior proms for most high school students supposed to be this consecration of sexual attraction and two-thirds of them are disasters. Wedding ceremonies are very expensive and fraught. I mean, it's tough stuff. You're not alone. That's comforting that I'm not alone. The idea to remind me that rituals are hit or miss. Wonderful. Oh, yes, absolutely. They serve a purpose. They require a lot of effort, too, which is part of the anxiety and part of why some people don't like it, I think. Especially if it doesn't go well routinely. Yeah, for sure. We're coming in the homestretch, which on this show, if you've ever listened or watched, you know that means I have a series of very specific questions for Alan coming up. Now, you teased us a little bit earlier talking about the penguins and some other stuff. Typically, Jason, for those first time listeners, what I like to do at the end, Alan always has some wonderful insights to parallels in the animal kingdom to anything we've discussed. Typically, we focus on a single emotion. So it's a little bit more of a casting a wider net here. But I'd like to ask for an adorable and sometimes inadvertently sexual example of what we've discussed in the animal kingdom. Alan, what do you got any information on rituals within the animal kingdom or anything that would mirror kind of what we've been discussing today? Yeah, I mean, I think that the seasonality of migratory patterns, mating behaviors, elephants going and finding the water and all that kind of stuff. I'm not a zoologist, but I've seen some nature documentaries. And, you know, the emotions that we feel are and they're not programs, but they they play a part in motivating behaviors that are appropriate to a given calendar.
And so the way these rituals are set up and the way these transitions between seasons are set up biologically and by culture is to reinvoke sort of this series of emotional states that drives you to want to satisfy what the rituals are going for, what you need for this period in your life, what the season is going to bring about, you need to, you know, store up all the nuts before you hibernate and all that stuff, no matter what animal you are. So I think there's definitely parallels there. I don't know that animals feel, although perhaps there are some exceptions, the kind of nostalgia that we have in the same way, I think they feel nostalgic since they probably occupy this sort of emotional state of the past and it puts them into that zone. Whenever, whenever a really large dog sits on your lap and you go, oh, he still thinks he's a puppy. I'll choose to believe that's a dog feeling nostalgic. Exactly. Right. They don't even understand the passage of time in the same way we do. I don't think. I really don't. No, they don't. Yeah. Maybe elephants do. Perhaps. I was reading something about elephants and this is all anecdotal. So who knows if this actually happened, but I'm inclined to believe it. Not only do we know that they mourn the death of their own, but there was a story of elephants that visited a funeral for a human that had been with them for a while and they knew of that person's passing and they like arrived to honor that as well. And that blew me away when I read that. But I also read it on the Internet. So I don't know. There wasn't. It's probably hard to say exactly what happened, but I wouldn't be surprised. I think they're smart enough to understand that something's gone and will not come back. Here's the last animal question of the year that I'll ask you, Alan. We've talked many times of the capuchin monkey experiment. We've only talked about it so many times because I refuse to not bring it up. And they exchanged in that experiment, they exchanged currency for pornographic images. I'm not going to get into any more detail than that. Look it up. This is a real thing that happened. Did any of those monkeys ever, out of the goodness of their little monkey heart, give another monkey a gift? Well, monkeys are constantly giving each other gifts of sorts.
They're sharing food. They're grooming each other. It's a classic thing. And all of this is done in a way that determines sort of the social hierarchy and shapes things so that people that groomed you are more likely to be your allies if there's a dispute over who is the new alpha or whatever, you know, there's really complex social dynamics, and I don't think that they're thinking about it in a super Machiavellian way. I think it probably is driven a lot by feelings, or, you know, whether we call them instincts or feelings is the same thing, you know, it's their brain enters a state of, you know, gratitude or conciliation or whatever it is to match the context and drives behaviors. Oh, thank God. What a wonderful answer to end on. That was fantastic. Thank you for that, Alan. And thank you for the past 10 episodes indulging my ridiculous animal questions. I appreciate it. And thank you. We're gonna have to wrap things up, unfortunately, because we're kind of out of time here. But before we sign off, just a massive, massive thank you to our guest today, Jason Silva. It's been beyond wonderful. Thank you. Having you on the show, man. I'm so glad we were able to make it work. And I cannot stress how much we appreciate you being so generous with your time and coming on the show with us. So thank you, man. Thank you to you. Yeah, well, thank you so much for having me. And sorry if I was hard to pin down. It wasn't my intention. I'm so happy we made it work. Of course. I apologize if I made it sound as though you were difficult to pin down. I just know you're a busy dude and you're in demand, man. No, no, no. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I was just thrilled we made the list. Awesome, man. Thrilled, thrilled to see you guys. And Dacher, great to see you again, brother. Good to see you, Jason. More shots of awe, man. Yeah. Yeah, bro. A hundred percent. That's right. See you soon. While we're doling out the thank yous, a huge thank you to Dr. Alan Cowen and Dr. Dacher Keltner. Hey, not just for today, guys, but for one hell of a season one. And though she could not be with us today for this episode, I would be remiss not to thank my co-host, Danielle Credit Cobb, for all her hard work and contributions to the show this season. It's been phenomenal working together. Same goes to Janet and the entire Hume AI team. Of course, Suzanne for making this happen and keeping the whole operation on the rails. And Owen, our man behind the curtain, for capturing all the magic. Massive thank yous.
For the last couple of months now, every week we here at the lab have gotten together to discuss and explore the nuanced nooks and crannies in the complex web of human emotions that shape our everyday lives. I set out with the goal of establishing for myself and hopefully instilling in you, our listeners, a newfound habit of noticing, an appreciation for the mountains of grey that exist between the black and white, and if you learned a thing or two about a capuchin monkey along the way, like I did, all the better. I typically end each episode with what I hope reads as a very sincere thank you for listening to our show. This will be no different. If this is your first time listening, I mean, kind of a weird spot to start, but you know, thank you nonetheless. I highly recommend you go back in the feed and check out some of our other episodes. I'd like to think we did a decent job. If this isn't your first time, then really, seriously, thank you for giving us some of your time and taking this ride with us. We hope you come back around and hang out with us again next year. And just like that, season one is done, but our work here is far from complete. Enjoy the rest of 2021. Keep an eye on this feed as the Feelings Lab will be back in 2022. We'll be shifting our conversations ever so slightly and asking a whole new set of questions, and we've got a feeling you won't want to miss it. Farewell for now from all of us at the Feelings Lab. I'm Matt Forte. Have a wonderful holiday, a happy new year, and everybody please stay safe out there.
