We hold these truths to be self-evident that all men are created equal. I have a dream that one day on the red hills of Georgia, the sons of former slaves and the sons of former slave owners will be able to sit down together at the table of brotherhood. I have a dream that one day even the state of Mississippi, a state sweltering with the heat of injustice, sweltering with the heat of oppression, will be transformed into an oasis of freedom and justice. Just as I have a dream. But why, some say, the moon? Why choose this as our goal? And they may well ask, why climb the highest mountain? Why, 35 years ago, fly the Atlantic? Why does Rice play Texas? We choose to go to the moon. We choose to go to the moon. We choose to go to the moon in this decade and do the other things, not because they are easy, but because they are hard. Because that goal will serve to organize and measure the best of our energies and skills. Because that challenge is one that we're willing to accept, one we are unwilling to postpone, and one we intend to win, and the others too. I don't know why, but when I hear those speeches, I get chills. What about you? What are you feeling right now? Let's keep going. Let's do another one. When day comes, we ask ourselves, where can we find light in this never-ending shade?
We carry a sea we must wade, we've braved the belly of the beast, we've learned that quiet isn't always peace, and the norms and notions of what just is, isn't always just is. And yet the dawn is hours before we knew it, somehow we do it, somehow we've weathered and witnessed a nation that isn't broken, but simply unfinished. We the successors of a country and a time where a skinny black girl descended from slaves and raised by a single mother can dream of becoming president only to find herself reciting for one. Goosebumps. You can't tell from over there, but I got goosebumps, literal goosebumps, which, by the way, what even is a goosebumps? When you start to think about what they are, it's super weird. I don't know, I get lost sometimes, sorry, but hello world, what is up? Welcome to the Feelings Lab. I'm your host, Matt Forte, and today we're going to be talking about awe. Okay, so we chose this as our jumping off point because it's kind of the perfect encapsulation of this entire series. Awe is something I'm sure all of us would say we've experienced at some point, but may have difficulty articulating exactly what it is or how we know we're experiencing it. I want to find out how I can become more mindful and aware of awe, and once I do that, does that mean that I can engage in it more frequently? Look, I've got a bunch of questions, but thankfully, joining me today once again, we've got the infinitely smarter than I am dancers. That's right. Dr. Alan Cowan is back, Dr. Decker Keltner is here, and of course, the great Danielle Credit Cobb. But that's not all. I promised you special guests, and this one, well, is pretty awesome, a super special treat. Joining us today, founder and publisher of Sounds True, host of the popular Insights at the Edge podcast series, the one and only Tammy Simon.
I'm here with Tammy Kemp. Tammy, thank you so much for being here with us. How are you doing? I feel awesome. And thank you for calling me awesome. It's a great way to start. You are very truly awesome. How are your dogs doing? I know you have some awesome dogs at home as well. So you know, it touches my heart that you asked about them. They're fabulous. Thank you. That's wonderful. That's what we want to hear. How about the rest of my friends, panel hosts, experts? How you guys doing? Decker, Danielle, Alan, how are you guys? Great. My dog is sleeping right here. I was going to point out, Danielle, I see you have a pooch with you. He is our wizened mystic sage temple dog for the moment. That's wonderful. Sadly, I had to send my dog upstairs because even though he was sound asleep next to me, if someone even comes remotely close to our front gate, he will wake up and bark very dramatically. And I do appreciate it. But honestly, once you get to the door, he's also your best friend. So he's not the greatest guard dog, but he's perfect in his own way. Well, I'm super excited that each of you are here. I actually have a little card that I wrote down. Each of you have several textbooks worth of thoughts on this, I'm sure. Decker, I think you literally wrote the textbook on awe. And just as we're going through tonight, I got a couple of questions I jotted down to keep us on track. If we cover these, great. If we don't, also great. The first one was, how does awe relate to happiness, which I have a personal story I can share later if we get to that one. I wrote down why. Why do we experience it? How is it evolutionarily advantageous? Why does it exist? What does awe do? And that's a big one that I wanted to get to. And of course, Alan, I brought this up last week when you mentioned the mice tickling, which I'm not providing any further context. If you want to know what we're talking about, go back to episode zero. But I did say, because of that, every episode, I'm going to want to know now, how do these emotions present in the animal world? Do animals experience awe? And that one, I'm going to make sure we get to that one, whether it's at the end or not. But I have a couple of these written down. We'll see if we get to them. Fingers crossed. But Decker, you are as qualified as they come, sir. I defer to your expertise. You literally wrote the book on awe. So where do you think we should start? How far back should we go? What's the first question we should be asking?
Ao is, almost by definition, beyond words. It is hard for people to define it, to describe it. Great writing traditions, the kinds of traditions that Tammy represents, sounds true, spiritual traditions, contemplative traditions, we have felt it. I think we have to start with a definition, which is, it is when you encounter vast mysteries that your mind can't make sense of. It astonishes you, and then Ao unleashes a variety of processes to make sense of things. It creates wonder, a state of mind where you go for answers. It dissolves the self, the ego, if you will. Those effects of Ao, those parts of Ao, help us dive into mysteries of life. It is when we encounter vast mysteries, that is where I would start, is the definition. When we encounter vast mysteries. I love that. Alan, how do you feel about that, encountering vast mysteries? That mixes together the two appraisals that classically evoke Ao, which is vastness, the reaction to something really, really big, making you feel small, and the need for accommodation. Finding out something that you totally didn't understand, you don't have a schema to understand, and you have to integrate it with your understanding of reality in a new way. I feel like that is a really nice encapsulation of what evokes Ao. When I think of Ao, I think of the thing when people are looking at their computer screen and go, oh, wow, and then everybody looks over. That's the classic Ao. Everyone's looking over at your screen. They're not looking at you because they want to find out what it is that you learned that caused you to feel like there was some break in your reality that you need to accommodate new information. Yeah. And depending on what's on that screen, that's also coupled by shame and immediate control, like W, of closing the window. It all depends where you are and what it is. Tammy, for several decades now, through all of your work, you have this incredible way, I think, of reframing very personal parts of the human experience, recontextualizing it and shifting the way we perceive and live through that experience. A great example, of course, being your book on—
blackness before dawn, and for someone who is so attuned and who has been such an instrumental voice in a lot of people's journeys, what brings awe to you? You know, now that we have that definition, how do you engage it? Do you ration it out and keep it special? I'm very curious about your personal relationship with the feeling of awe. What's remarkable to me is how it's so available. You're ready for this, in everything, in every little minute, everything. If there's a certain quality of attention and engagement and presence and deep, spacious relationship. So, you know, I've been experimenting, knowing that we were going to have this conversation with awe, and I experimented with this. First, go ahead and like it. And this is a practice I learned from a Sounds True author, Jacqueline Suskin, who's a poet. Just find anything in your environment and go ahead and like it as a starting point. It could be anything. It could be right now in my environment. Well, OK, I have a bell in front of me. It's the first thing I saw. I know it seems a little classic, but I use it to start meetings. And I like it. And then spend a little bit more time with it. Go into it a little bit more. And what happens for me once I start liking it, and then there's a deeper process, which is something happens and it becomes so mysterious to me. Like, what actually is this thing? Oh, my God. And there is a way that I feel a sense. I don't know how else to put it, but kind of like my mind being blown by this everyday object that sits on my desk. And then there's a quality as I keep going deeper into it. I don't know what it is exactly. What is this object? And a feeling that opens up of time stopping, of transcendence, of just this open state of mysterious presence. So what's curious to me is how we can find that wherever we are right now in this moment in your environment. Wow, very inspiring words, and it reminds me not to trivialize it, but the same part of my brain.
That will sometimes almost forget what a word that I've said a million times, or if I say it too many times and I focus too much on that word, it starts to lose meaning and I forget what that word is. And I have to say, I think it was recently also a joke in Ted Lasso, but I've experienced this many times before. It's like you say it over and over and it loses its sense. And I never thought of doing that with a physical object of just sort of examining it and spending time with it until I am mystified by it. It also, Daniel, it reminds me of something you and I were talking to not too long ago off air that you said awe is not reserved for a few times in a lifetime. You get a choice and awe is a skill. And that stuck with me when I remember you said that. And, you know, as someone myself who's still in the process of sharpening that tool, I suppose it's possible that I feel it all the time, but I just haven't really realized it or acknowledged it or have a name for it. Right? Yeah. I mean, what I found so interesting when I first started learning about awe was, um, I remember specifically reading when Dagger was talking about everyday awe and there are all these flavors of awe. There's wild awe and mystical awe and the everyday awe that Tammy was just bringing us into the kind of mysterious presence of, um, is such a great example because you think of awe sort of like, you know, a really, um, a really delicious dessert shared amongst friends is something that only gets to happen every now and then, like it's a holiday or something. Like it's reserved for the moment that you reach the peak of Kilimanjaro and nothing else. And what's lovely is that it's actually something that is around us in every moment, if we choose to tune into it. And that idea of choosing to tune into it, choosing to come into resonance with something, be in the presence of it, acknowledge our presence as part of that. And I think that, that kind of, um, the fact that it, that it, it sits around us kind of Alice in Wonderland, like all the time. It's like, things are not what they seem. If only you can kind of drop into that. And, and, um, this idea too, I think carries in it a sense of like, it's not just this kind of vastness that opens up, uh, opens up to us or opens up within us. It's actually this feeling like we begin to have a sense of our place inside of it.
We're belonging to something bigger. Yeah, that for me is just a beautiful way to step into anything. You know, Matt, I have to weigh in. I mean, we did this research and we just surveyed people on a daily basis, like do you feel odd today and write about it? We studied people in Japan and China and the US and Barcelona and other places. The most surprising findings, what Tammy and Danielle were talking about, it wasn't hypothesized, is three times a week people are feeling odd. You know, they're walking to school or to work and they see a shadow on the sidewalk or a person being really generous with a stranger and they're feeling this emotion. I think one of the stereotypes or misconceptions of odd is it's rare, and it's when you're at the Grand Canyon or you're hugging the Dalai Lama. It's like Tammy said. As you do. That's a good one. That's a good one. It works. But, you know, it's all over the place and you can get a little obsessed and like, man, my faucet on my, you know, the little handle on my faucet is incredible. You know, and oops, you know, so, but it's around us. And I like Tammy's exercise. I was going to say, yeah, is there a sweet spot, right? That you've got to find a healthy balance of engaging in odd but not over engaging. Well, let's take a moment. Imagine if people were more odd obsessed. Just imagine that. I mean, that's not what we're finding, you know, those aren't the people I'm running into. I would love that. I mean, I think we need to take the balance far over in that direction before we're worried about getting too far in that direction. That's just my own view. No. And, you know, I mean, Rachel Carson, who's, I think, one of the most important odd writers in human history. The great environmentalist writes this essay about teaching kids to feel wonder in 1956. And this is before all of our kids became super stressed out and, you know, rising suicide rates, et cetera. And she's like, man, we are losing, you know, this, this balance and we need more awe. So I'm with Tammy. Let's all start the awe revolution, you know, we need more of it.
And you can have too much of it, but it's, it's in peril in many ways. Right. So you could have too much, but right now, let's not worry about that. Let's get that needle pushed in the other direction. And then once we have too much of it, we'll worry about it. We'll sort that out. But in the meantime, let's encourage as much awe as we can is what I'm getting. Well, that brings me to like one of my big questions, which was how does awe relate to happiness? Because I think you're right. As I'm listening to all of these things and learning so much already so early in our conversation, I'm realizing that my threshold for awe was set probably too high. And I don't know how it ended up there. I don't know if I put it there subconsciously or how it arrived there, but that's where it was. And so, you know, how does awe relate to happiness and does awe exist without happiness? Can I just be in awe of something and not necessarily happy? Dacher, Alan, I'm putting you guys in the crosshairs. Can I experience, especially Alan, you're my nuanced guy. Can I experience awe, but also sadness? So there's negative manifestations of awe. So awe is not always a positive emotion. I think that you have to consider awe plus fear, which can often be shock. The idea of shock and awe in the military sense is very true to the feeling of awe as well. The idea that you can overwhelm people into being paralyzed because all it does sort of paralyze us, forces us to rethink our reality and to kind of regroup our cognition. So I think that is a negative manifestation of awe. You become overwhelmed. People, awe can turn into a panic attack. I'm sort of playing devil's advocate here. No, this can happen. And there's many different ways that awe can be combined with other positive emotions. And so happiness is this sort of all encompassing category. But you can separate out sort of pride and awe, which can turn into an admiration or patriotism. You can talk about mystery and eeriness and dreaminess and awe, and that can turn more into different kinds of spirituality. Perhaps there's different contexts for awe. Sometimes we feel it collectively there. I think it really is more spirituality. And then sometimes it's almost institutionalized. And that's where you get sort of institutionalized nationalism.
And it can be a positive or potentially a negative in rare cases. Dagger, is that something we've, as a species, is that something we've observed from the very beginning and the origins of like our observations around awe? Have we always acknowledged that it exists sort of within this, its own spectrum? Yeah. And in fact, I think that's going to be one of the really interesting areas of scholarship in this new science of awe and the new scholarship more broadly of awe is the cultural trajectories of awe and how it's shaped by history and context, right? You know, when you look at indigenous accounts of mystical experience that are thousands of years old that predate the written word, a lot of it is about this more positive version of awe that Tammy gave us a flavor of. When you get to the dark ages, right, when people are dying young and there's tons of violence, awe becomes really dark. And it's about horror, as Alan said, and encountering death and violence, right? So it shapes and transforms a lot as we move through history. You know, Einstein's discoveries of quantum physics changed the nature of awe. So it's just one of these fascinating emotions that moves around, but ultimately is about encountering the mysteries that are beyond our understanding. Yeah, I'm curious. You mind if I interrupt? I'm so curious. No, I want you to go for it. When I tend to think about like happiness and the experience of it, I almost get like uncomfortable with happiness because it feels too like red bold, whereas like contentment or peacefulness maybe is more my vibe of having. But what's interesting is when I think about awe, it's like it transforms us. It can heal us. It expands us. It merges us. It quiets the mind.
weights and you know, kind of does all of these things, but so much of that is like ego or whatever the default solver. It's like the the me that we think is me the me that lives in the movie of me dissolves and melts away into something. So it's curious me because when I think about awe and happiness, part of the kind of expansive resting into awe is like you not quite being you anymore, because you're a little bit of everything else, too. So I'm curious how that works, because I'm not a computational emotion scientist. I'm just the messy human that's like, is it kind of like this, but Well, you know, I mean, that's part of, you know, that's part of what's important about Alan's computational work is people hadn't really put up all these different states, right, that people have been thinking about for millennia, in the contemplative traditions of ecstasy and bliss and joy and gratitude and awe and beauty and love and desire and then how do they all relate and what are the variations and And awe is this unique space of self dissolving as well as Daniel put unlike pride or triumph for desire. So it, that's why we need this kind of science to start to answer those questions. But, you know, maybe Tammy would speak about some of the contemplative traditions because They've been observing their minds for a long time and and making sense of like, wow, what is it like when I feel bliss towards the divine when I completely dissolve. As opposed to when I feel all this powerful being where I'm still aware of the relationality. I don't know. Do you see that these interesting states in the kinds of work you have done, Tammy. I do. And yet what I'm appreciating about the conversation is this nuance around emotions that I'm not as literate in that is really It's really interesting to me and just just for a moment before moving into the mystical states. I just want to underscore something which is I was reflecting on why do we use the word awful and the word awesome.
And they both have awe in them, and you answered that in this conversation in a way that hadn't been clear to me before. So I just wanted to make a shout out about that. I don't know if you have more to say about that, just this root word awe in our language. Well, you know, eggy and oggy, which trades back to ninth century Old English and then Norse, was about threat and horror. And so awful things, awe filled things in the ninth century were torture and horror and bodies succumbing to plagues. And now awesome, awe filled things have changed as our human history has changed. I am this is my favorite show in the world, by the way, I'm so excited that I get to have all of these amazing brains right now kind of coming together and learning so much. I appreciate all of it. And we started to get into this, Tammy, but I'd love to hear a little bit more. So the Sounds True Foundation is all about bringing mindfulness and this toolkit of awareness to those who would not otherwise typically have access to it. It's an amazing organization. And in your travels, not just with that organization, but in general, what have you observed around the world and what does it look like? Have you firsthand had a chance to experience and observe different flavors of awe in different cultures and in different people and everything you've done? Sure, sure. Well, I think a really big key to awe for me, and I hope this answers your question, has to do with connecting with being, connecting with presence. And for me, that's the place where there isn't this separation where I'm just I mean, you observe something that's a you know, you're separate from it. And that's a like foothills of awe, sometimes deep appreciation, celebration of something amazing, you know, watching a great feat. But for me, the real sort of awe show stopping moment is when it's almost like there's a like a top at the head and it cracks open. And it's that's the way it feels to me. That's why I feel it in my body, like feel it like my head broke open. Out in the house, to put it.
This podcast is produced by Hume AI, a research lab and technology company. This podcast is produced by Hume AI, a research lab and technology company. Essentially, the point was, if you feel awe, you believe in God. And again, I'm paraphrasing. I'm taking things. But that was more or less the concept that she was conveying, is that if you feel awe, you believe in God. And I want to unpack that. You know, why? Why do we connect awe to spirituality? You know, is awe inherently spiritual? And I'd love to get your perspective on that. On awe and spirituality, not Oprah. However, if you do have a hot take on Oprah, I'm willing to pivot. Sure. Sure. Well, I think for me, when I'm experiencing awe, I'm experiencing the preciousness of life. Everything that's alive seems so precious and like something I want to care for. And, you know, so even when you're saying like, you know, well, can we have too much? And I was like, no, let's have more of it. Because what I know is when I feel awe in relationship to the natural world, I want to care for it. When I feel awe in relationship to the silverware in my kitchen that I'm picking up, I want to care for it. I want to make sure it's clean and it's put away well. And it's a cure for a sort of over consumerism because I have so much love and care for the objects.
That are directly in my environment. So I think it's, you know, I don't have to jump to God, but it's an incredible celebration of life, of the glory of life. That's actually is beautiful. And it reminds me of I'd said at the top, there was a personal story link to happiness that I was going to share. And the short version of it is one of my most recent encounters, I felt as I was examining, you know, I've been experiencing all. And there's a place not too far from where I live. It's called Rye Playland, which is, it's both famous and no one's ever heard of it, but it's essentially a little amusement park. And last year during the pandemic, I was biking, cycling, which is all you could do safely. And every day I'd go out there. Right. And of course it was desolate, abandoned because pandemic. And a couple of weeks ago, my wife and I were like, all right, let's go out. We haven't seen the park in forever. We'll put on double masks if it's crowded, we'll leave. But we went and I hadn't been there in forever. And the last time I'd seen it, it was this empty place, right? Devoid of life. And all I ever had were these childhood memories. And so she and I go, we didn't even get on rides, which is a big deal when you hit a certain age. And, um, and we just walked around and there was a moment, uh, where it was very emotional just to be there because life had been restored. People were there on the Ferris wheel was going, they were walking on the boardwalk, kids were laughing and playing games. And it was, I had, we just took a moment to just kind of stand there and just be in the moment and absorb all of that energy because life had returned to this place that, uh, very recently it felt like would never be the same again. And it was like this glimmer of hope in this just sea of hopelessness that's been happening since the pandemic kind of kicked off of just like, will we ever get back to normal? And it wasn't normal. Everybody was wearing masks and being safe and distancing, but it was almost normal. And it was a taste of normal. And that moment was very overwhelming. And I felt like, uh, what I interpreted as a sense of awe. And as we were discussing, I was like, well, maybe that wasn't all, maybe that was something else. But just now, as you're describing, oh, I care for these things in a celebration of life. And I was like, it was all, I did feel it. That's what it was. And so, so thank you. Um, I'm curious cause we, I do want to get to the animals thing and we are getting a little short on time here. So we'll get to that. But, uh, just if anybody else, Danielle.
I'm joined by Matt, Daniel, Alan, Dekker, Tammy, of course, recent experiences of all. Tammy, I know we just went through one with you with the bell, which was a wonderful joy. But anything similar like that has occurred to you, or have you reevaluated and rediscovered something now throughout this conversation? I think I resonate with your story, Matt, in that this pandemic sort of took away so many things we've taken for granted. And I've been saying that, you know, as you habitualize the things that are in your reality, they evoke less and less awe, because you don't grow any new synapses, you know, it's just the same thing over and over, and you don't feel it in the same way, and you feel it less and less. And there's actually less activity, brain activity evoked by that thing. But then you take it away, and you bring it back. And I think what's awe-inspiring or most about seeing everything come back into place, is that it was that way before, we just didn't really appreciate it. And now we're coming to sort of appreciate it anew, and that in itself is awe-inspiring at a meta level, and literally, just the fact that it's the novelty of it, it's so not novel at the same time. Yeah, yeah. No, there's a lot of layers there, for sure. I don't want to get too far from it, as we're going down this path, but, you know, Dacher, in your studies, why do people tend to drift towards connecting it to spirituality? Was that the initial sort of take on awe, or is that something that we as humans sort of added over time? What's the history tell us about that? Well, it's a really deep history, and there are different perspectives on it. You know, Jane Goodall, one of probably a hero of many people here, said she watched these chimpanzees doing this waterfall dance, and she said, wow, they're showing feelings of awe and early beginnings of spirituality. So we know that mammals do something like awe, and we can talk about that in a bit. I think that, you know, the first thing to recognize is, I think this is really important too, is your example of getting back out into the world and being awestruck by human life turns out to be a deep human universal, which is about 50% of awe experience.
Our goal is to create a world where people's experiences around the world are not nature or spirituality, they're other people, other people's beauty, other people's goodness. When Alan came to my office and showed his first map of emotion, and he's the first scientist to really prove that awe is different from feelings of beauty, the sources of awe were flowing rivers of humans in bike races and in cities and the like. I think what the current thinking is, is that we have these extraordinary experiences of being moved by people's goodness, the aspens that surround Tammy that are flickering in the light, big winds and the like. They're so extraordinary that we have to come up with an explanation to them and people invoke the divine. Ralph Waldo Emerson, it's one of the great moments in awe history, was in this museum in Paris. It was a museum of comparative anatomy where there are all these skeletons of cats and dogs and whales and the like. He was awestruck by the design of species and he said, that's God. I think our thinking is that this is an extraordinary experience. Depending on where you grow up and what your people are telling you, we come up with these explanations of them. I think Oprah, I hate to say it, is wrong. It's not necessarily about God. It's about what's transcended in life. I'd like to add something in that's really a connection made afresh for me during this conversation, which is, Alan, when you talked about awe as this vastness and then in the definition you said, the need for accommodation. A light went on for me in relationship to spirituality as that which cannot be accommodated because the name that can be named is not the name. You can't actually say G-D. For me, spirituality is something that's beyond our ability to put it in any construct, in any frame.
You've put a frame on it, you've reified it, you've concretized it, it's not the real spiritual mystery to me. So to me spirituality in itself is so awesome because it can't be accommodated actually by our human verbal construction. Wow, that's so interesting that we reserve enduring mystery right which we have to have for spirituality. And that's such a novel take on where that sentiment comes from. It's really cool. For sure. It makes sense. I hadn't thought about it that way. But once you've solved whatever it is, that is the mystery, it no longer is something that needs to be accommodated. Right? Yeah. That tracks. So it could be spirituality is something that is sort of designed to evoke awe over and over and over and never fully accommodated. For me, the big takeaway is Dakar thinks Oprah is wrong. Don't say that. And she watches. So she's going to see that. I know. I don't know if she watches. I mean, Gail does at the very least. We have to know that much. Right? But amazing, amazing conversation. But I swear I'm not letting you go without tapping into this. And we almost did it there. To the best of our knowledge, is awe uniquely human? I know that's hard to answer because we ourselves are human. We are not dogs. We are not primates. But what we have seen, what we do know, what can you tell me? Have we have we seen on other other friends out there, furry or otherwise? So I think there's different levels to which different emotions can be seen in other species. And I think awe is one of the ones that is really hard to find parallels of in animals, non-human animals. And that in and of itself is interesting. If you look at one of the physiological manifestations of awe, which is goose bumps, they mean something completely different in a lot of non-human primates, which is pylo erection raises the hairs and causes you to look bigger. It's something the alpha males do to try to intimidate other conspecifics. So it's a totally different thing in non-human primates, which tells you something in a way. It's sort of co-opted for a different purpose.
» Thank you. » I'm going to start off by saying I think in the context of this, social hierarchies are really, really important in nonhuman primates. Social hierarchies are also important in humans. But I think one of the things that is not so much unique about humans but one of the things that humans take to a new level is the idea of focusing on one thing at a time. And I think that's really important. And I think that's why this thing is the way it is, just to understand reality. So, you know, we vocalize others, vocalize us. Oh, you know, that vocalization brings us together. Everyone, all emotional localizations orient everybody to a specific kind of thing. We hear it and we look for what caused it. And in the case of awe, it's looking for a mystery, right? And that's something that humans are uniquely good at. You see it to some extent in other species as well. » I want to pick on that. I want to pick on that. I want there to be awe for other species because I feel like that's the way, that's the reciprocal nature of being on the planet. And if I've learned anything from James Cameron and his class on the whales, no, but whales are a social species. And when I think about collective effervescence and I think about moving in unison and I think about synchrony and I look at honeybees and it's like maybe they don't have the story they tell themselves, which we humans are so good at for both our betterment and our worsening. But it's like the true inherent interconnecting, merging, you know, the metonymy of the part in the whole and all of that juice, they've got to be feeling that in the ocean when everybody gets back together in the Arctic. They've got to be feeling that in the hive when the honey's really flowing. Right? I mean, this is just... » I'd like to believe they are. » But I'm like, I want that. I believe it. I feel it. » I know. And you know, this is where the science is, you know, I mean, and many social mammals probably have the rudiments of awe, like through different pathways, as Danielle's suggesting, collective movement. We don't know a lot about whales. They're hard to study. And that would be a fascinating thing.
We do know certain social mammals, when they fluff up their fur like Alan was saying, kind of lean into each other and become more than the individual. They become a collective to handle peril like cold, right? They lean in to warm each other up. So there is some, there's some fabric of collective awareness that's very foundational to awe, but... Cuddling is the gateway drug of awe. No, I'm kidding. That's the t-shirt right there. I do have a question. You asked previously about the relationship between awe and happiness. And I'm interested to know the relationship between awe and ecstasy, because then I want to share something about one of my dogs, if there's a relationship between awe and kind of resting in a state of ecstatic, just, you know, being, is there a connection, ecstasy and awe? Yeah. Yeah, you know, the best evidence, obviously they're part of these self-transcendent states that Alan mapped and this field is getting interested in, gratitude, bliss, joy, ecstasy. Ecstasy where you totally dissolve is a little bit different than awe. And there are studies of festivals where you, you know, this festival in India where millions of people go to the river for sacred reasons, they are ecstatic and they come out of it and awe is central to their narrative. Like I am part of something way beyond this flesh and bones tabernacle. So, so I want to hear your story of your dog. Well, yeah, so I have a dog named Bula and Bula rests and we're probably just talking about like 12-ish hours a day on her back with both, you know, her hind legs up and, and she's clearly in, in a total state of ecstatic bliss. And she just rests like that. She's the only one in our family. I have another dog who's quite neurotic and there's, you know, me and my wife, we're doing our thing and we look over at Bula on the couch. I'm like, how does she do it? What's going on with her? We can all strive to be a little more like Bula. Indeed. Yeah. Running through the foothills of awe. Well, it's just, thank you for sharing.
This podcast is produced by Hume AI, a research lab and technology company. This podcast is produced by Hume AI, a research lab and technology company. This podcast is produced by Hume AI, a research lab and technology company. Check out SoundsTrue.com, not just for that podcast but all of the incredible work. To our listeners, I hope you come back each week and continue this journey with us! Like Danielle said, it is a choice. Don't forget that if you enjoyed this show, even if it's the tiniest bit, just a scootch. Don't forget that if you enjoyed this show, even if it's the tiniest bit, just a scooch. Share the podcast. Tell a friend. Write a nice little review. They'd give you 1-5 stars, whichever one you choose, that's up to you. I'm not going to tell you how to live your life. But go ahead, it helps us out a lot. So, anybody out there, if you have any questions you'd like us to answer, or an embarrassing story or two, I know I'm going to share a few, go ahead and share them with us. Feel free to email us at TheFeelingsLab at Hume.ai. That's T-H-E-F-E-E-L-I-N-G-S-L-A-B at Hume.ai.
And that's going to do it. Farewell for now, my friends, from where else but the Feelings Lab. I'm Matt Forte. Thank you so much again to everybody. Stay safe out there. Have a great one. I'm Matt Forte. Thank you so much again to everybody.
