Hello world, what is up? Welcome back to the Feelings Lab. I'm your host Matt Forte, and on today's episode, we're tackling some common myths about emotion. Now, when the opportunity to host this show first presented itself almost a year ago now, actually, I couldn't say yes fast enough for one very simple reason. I was in love with Alan. That's not true. I didn't even know him yet. I'm just messing around. The truth is, I jumped at the job because I wanted to learn. A part of my self-imposed curriculum here has been to scour the internet in search of any articles, stories, hot takes of moderate interest, things like that. Anything whatsoever having to do with emotion science and the types of things that we talk about here on the show. Now, in doing so, I inevitably wind up with more questions after reading something than I had before I started. But what's incredibly cool about hosting this thing here is I find myself uniquely positioned to take my questions, not to Google, but directly to some of the most brilliant folks in the game. In most cases, the leading minds in their respective fields. Admittedly, I do on occasion throw a question in there about a gambling monkey or something of that nature. I'm only human, but ultimately I recognize it's a great privilege that I have here. I try not to take it for granted. Anyway, all of that is to say there's a ton of stuff out there for you to read and absorb. And while I know this sounds like the preamble to another news episode, well, it kind of is, but with a twist. Much like the deeply nuanced spectrum of human emotion, the world of emotion science is surprisingly not nearly as black and white as one might expect with the word science right there in the title. I've read pieces that assert facial expressions are actually meaningless with multiple interpretations of Darwin's position on the matter. I've heard emotions are universal, but also regionally specific and culturally constructed. There's lots of very smart people out there that are all actively trying to figure out how all this works. And it's a process. Naturally, camps have formed with competing schools of thought.
It is a program that is based on the principles of thought on multiple sides, and that's a totally normal human thing to be expected. But the surprising bit is that most scientists don't actually sit in these polarized camps. The answers may not be the cut and dry binary debates we expect, but rather, and quite often mind you, it's a mixture of both sides residing somewhere in between. So what are we going to do? Well, today we're going to tackle some of these ideas and more, all of them, right here on the show. This is an episode with the potential for a little bit of controversy, which I, for one, fully embrace and I'm very excited about. Something else I'm excited about, my co-host and our guest. Let's bring them on in that order. Up first, CEO and chief scientist with Hume AI and co-host of this very show. While he wasn't my first love, I do admire him greatly. Dr. Alan Cowen is here. Alan, how have you been, bud? How's your summer going? Doing great. Doing great. It's great to be here, Matt. It's great to have you with me, as always. For our guest, which I hesitate to even refer to him as such, he's a double inductee into the Feelings Lab five-timers club. Co-director of the Greater Good Science Center at UC Berkeley, frequent Pixar collaborator and best-selling author with his latest book, Awe, the new science of everyday wonder and how it can transform your life, available for free order right now. Please welcome back to the show, our guest, nay, fellow co-host, the one and only Dacher Keltner is here. Dacher, my goodness, so wonderful to see you. How are you? I'm doing well, Matt. Good to be here. What a fun conversation. It's great to have you here and happy to hear you're well. Anytime I can get the two of you together, my joy and curiosity are rivaled only by my feelings of inadequacy. So let's go ahead and jump right into this one. I've got some topics here, some quotes I pulled from different articles. Alan, I'll give you a signal when we get there, but some of these, I honestly think you might be better equipped to set up the stage for the discussion. So I'll tag you in when I feel like I'm out of my depth. But let's start with a big one right here. And I think sometimes I go back and forth. I can kind of see both sides of this, but ultimately I know where I land. Something I've been trying to wrap my head around is some articles that claim that studies have shown expressions don't reveal our emotions. I'm obviously going to want to hear from both of you, but in particular, Alan, I'm going to start with you and your perspective on this idea. So just talk to me for a second. The idea that expressions.
Expressions don't actually mean anything. What's going on here? Where's this coming from? Yeah, I mean, you know, the idea that expressions don't reveal our emotions is the kind of thing that's counterintuitive in one sense and then if you think about it a little bit, it's self-evident. I mean, if you said expressions aren't direct windows into our emotions, well, that's, you know, obviously self-evident. Nobody would click on that headline. If you said expressions don't express anything, that's something that's obviously false, right? Because it means something when I laugh or cry. I mean, imagine you have somebody who's screaming in your backyard, you know, you're going to run over the windows, see what's going on. So, clearly expressions mean something and it's been very clear that expressions have meaning, but at the same time aren't involuntary readouts of an internal state and I haven't really met a scientist who doesn't agree with that. I also don't think anybody who I've talked to is a lay person thinks that expressions are direct readouts of our emotions. Yeah, and I guess that's maybe that's what's happening, right? Is the headline and sometimes the article itself I feel is framing it with lacking that nuance and just stating plainly that they are pointless, they are meaningless and we're going to get to some big claims about that from some other people in a moment, but that's a very important one right there is that they're not meaningless, they just don't necessarily mean what they assume we're saying they mean. Am I getting that right? Does that make sense? Well, who? I mean, who's doing the assuming, right? So, I think the challenge has been that, you know, since the 60s, there was this idea posited in emotion science that there are six kind of basic expressions, anger, fear, disgust, sadness, surprise, and happiness. And, you know, Paul Ekman went around the world and he showed people expressions of each that he thought were expressions of each of these emotions. And people generally agreed that if you have to choose from those six, the mapping was as expected. But, you know, I don't think Paul Ekman ever thought those were the only six expressions. He said, you know, there are many different ways of expressing each of those emotions. He more recently has come to believe that there's actually a lot of different emotions that have some level of universality across.
I think that's what I get into trouble with is I feel like I'm always ever hearing half the thought where it's like they go, well, people don't only smile when they're happy. And that's the end of the argument. And it's like, well, right, but they do, they also do smile when they're happy. Like that is part of it. And they also can do other things when they're happy. And it just feels like a lot of people out there, they're drawing a very hard line in the sand. And I don't know that you can do that when we're talking about something as big and as vast as the human experience and emotion and stuff like that. And that's the impression I get from some of the stuff I've read. There's a particular interview I read from, I think like last year, there's a bunch out there. And it's with Microsoft's Kate Crawford. And she is very firmly of the position and cites recent work to support that there is no reliable correlation between expressions on the face and what we are actually feeling, which I get fine, be it for me, a lowly podcast host to question the work of this vastly more educated career scientist. But my struggle with it is this. If I think of like, any form of visual art, I'm going to go animation, all right. And yes, my Western bias is showing here, but this is what I think of. And communicating to the audience how a fictional, illustrated, two-dimensional character feels and is feeling in the moment on screen, what are the tools they use to tell that story? There's a million, but just a couple of them, the vocal performance, the body language. And for me, one of the most important of all, the facial expressions. You've seen the behind the scenes DVD extras, they have little mirrors, they look at their faces, they draw those things in there. What am I missing with this argument when someone says to me that there is no correlation? When I have all these years of experience and things that tell me, well, there is some correlation, there has to be. What am I missing? I have to weigh in here. Please, please. I'm sorry. Yeah. Historically, sometimes in areas of science, there are debates that are often independent
And it ebbs and flows, and it goes from the 1950s, people believe that expression didn't mean anything, Ekman, it means a lot. Now there's a counter to Ekman. And then, you know, the work that Alan and I have done for 15, 20 years reveals the expressions mean a lot. I'll note just a couple of things. Those are non-peer review statements. The article that some of those statements are based on in the press is non-peer review. That's really important for science. In point of fact, and I, you know, this is just what we have to do as scientists, which is the actual correlation. When you look at four or five emotions and subjective feeling is about 0.2, 0.25, which means it's stronger than 76% of what we call the effects, the causal effects of manipulations in social psychology. So it's real. And for whatever reason, through sociological processes of how they wanted to disseminate this idea, they made popular this idea that it doesn't correlate with experience. And there are a ton of other problems with that work. The broader point that you're making, Matt, is fundamental, which is that the paper, non-peer review that is the basis of that journalistic, you know, outcropping, if you will, was really about facial muscle movements for four or five emotions. Anger, sad, fear, disgust, happy. We already know that there are about 10 different displays of positive emotion. It's not happy. That's been published by Peer Review Science. And then more importantly, and this is where the paper is useful, is that, yeah, there's way more to expression than just facial muscle movements. In fact, Darwin, about half of his observations in the expression of emotion in man and animals are not about expressions at all, facial expressions. They're about voice, body, gaze, touch, gesture, patterns of blush and tearing, how you breathe, how you move your hands, right? And so that is a tiny slice of...
And Alan's done a lot of great work to, to, I think, set the course right, it's been misinterpreted and then overextended. And so hopefully our field will get back to what is, what is sensible and true. As I listen to you go through all those different facets and all these different things that we could in theory observe, I guess one of my frustrations, and I will chalk this up to, I could be doing more reading. Maybe there's a, maybe there is an answer to what I'm about to say. And I haven't personally discovered it from their perspective, from the, those that suggest there is no correlation, but it feels to me like, cause like, yes, they say it's not universal. We can't, we can't read it accurately because we're, we're too different. There's a, well, and of course what there's 8 billion of us on the planet. Of course, we're all going to have different ways in which we approach an emotion, but to suggest because of all the variables that there aren't also observable and documented consistencies, it feels to me, a lay person, like looking into the night sky and saying, well, there's just too many stars. So we're not going to forget about it. Don't even bother. Cause why, why bother? There's just so many of them. We're never going to really figure it out. That's the, the air I get whenever I read these and they go, well, it doesn't work and we shouldn't be doing it. I'm constantly waiting for the, okay, well, what, then what's the answer? What is all this stuff that we're doing? Yeah. You know, and some of the sub claims in this camp, right? You, it's not good to teach kids. It's a waste of time to teach kids how to read faces because it doesn't mean anything that's actually been disproven, right? Kids do better if they're pretty good at reading faces and voices. The emotional intelligence literature, the ruler program at Yale, you could never train an algorithm to detect emotion in the face or voice. Allen's done that. Published in the best journal in science, right? So, yeah, it's, I think it's back to this, the broader point that it's just interesting how in certain areas of science, there are ideological disputes. And as Allen said, most people don't, they're like, okay, those are the really radically opposing camps. You know, it's important to remember Darwin, wrote a lot about cultural variation. Variation is fundamental to evolution.
It's the fundamental dynamic, individual variation, cultural variation, and selection processes that flow out of variation. He wrote more about variation in expression than universality. So this whole, it's a total straw man that if you study the text carefully, it kind of falls apart. I want to come back. We're getting to Darwin a little bit because there's some explosives that I read. Go to somebody else. I'll call on Alan when we get there. But before we strayed too far from this, another thing, Alan, that I wanted to come to you with was the idea then if, and we've already talked about the peer-reviewed science and the correlations between facial expressions and emotions, but the other critique being that we shouldn't use AI to measure our expressions because the science upon which the AI is built may be flawed. Right? And you have firsthand experience more so than anybody I know in my life that can speak to me about not just abstractly this idea or this concept, but you've been in the weeds, in the trenches, teaching AI and working on this for years. This is where you eat, buddy. So when someone says and asks the question, should we be using AI to measure our expressions and to what end? You're the person I want to hear respond to that. So if you will respond. I mean, there's all these issues that get conflated in these arguments. When they're talking about this, they usually say, AI can't detect emotions or AI can't read emotions or emotion AI is pseudoscience. And all of this is based on the idea that it goes back to the argument that expressions are either involuntary readouts of our internal states or they're completely meaningless. And when you say measure expressions, then it makes it really clear that this is an important tool. understanding what people are trying to communicate, because a lot of what people are saying is not just in their words, but also in the way that they say things. There is a relationship between expressions and emotions. It's more complicated. They're not entirely, you know, there's a spectrum from like, unconscious, involuntary, which you know, expressions are not, to completely voluntary, always completely within our control, which is more like words.
And expressions are kind of in between. They're like words and then we can choose whether to express what we're feeling. So, at base, like words, we don't always say what we think. We don't always think what we say. Words are really powerful tools for communication nonetheless. The same goes for expression. Where expressions differ from words is that we have an urge to express ourselves sometimes. Sometimes we can't help but laugh. There's some things like blushing that are completely outside of our voluntary control. Most expressions are within our voluntary control, but they can also be difficult to fake. You know, it's easier to form an expression that's consistent with what we're feeling than one that's inconsistent with what we're feeling. And that's the very thing that makes acting difficult and that makes people who express their feelings to each other trust each other more, more than if it was just in text, right? And what it makes me trust somebody when you're with them and you're able to communicate more successfully when you're with them. And so, it's really, it's a false dichotomy. Our expressions involuntary readouts or meaningless, it doesn't make sense. And the idea that because expressions aren't involuntary readouts of our emotions, that we shouldn't have technologies that measure them, that's like a non sequitur, right? Because you don't have to believe expressions are direct windows into our emotions to understand that they're meaningful. And, you know, it's really, it's taken off in kind of, I think, a harmful way. I mean, there's many ways in which it's extremely important to be able to measure expressions with technology and do so in a way that's transparent to humans. For one thing, technology that measures expressions is going to, it's here whether we like it or not. You know, the large language models, any large machine learning model that processes human data comes up with representations of expressions. This has been well documented. There are representations of emotion in GPT-3, of expression in DALI, and in all of these large language models. But we just, without having a way of measuring that, we can't control it. We can't say this is what you should do when you measure an expression, this is how you should respond. These are the good expressions, these are the bad expressions. And so we really need this technology to develop.
in tandem to be able to control and optimize how technologies treat our emotional behaviors. And so, I think it can do harm to have this argument going around. And one of the, you know, one of the interesting traps in this literature, Matt, and why Alan's work, you know, on training systems to detect 16 facial expressions of distinct, well-studied emotions in the literature, making significant progress on the voice where there are 20 to 25 peer review, you know, replicable signatures to emotions with variations. One of the reasons that he's been successful and some of the AI models have failed is, you know, he cast his net broadly, right? And so, if you just go in looking for happiness and you see all this variety of smiles and varieties of laughs and varieties of pride versus love versus contentment versus laughter or joy or awe, you'll miss it. You'll miss all that meaning. And Alan started differently and has been able to train models to capture that. If you only stick with those Ekman four or five emotions, you don't get to all the self-conscious emotions, right? Which are wildly prevalent in social life and Alan can pick them up. So, it's, you know, in some sense, it was a simple solution but often ignored given entrenched positions. One of the things you see a lot of when I see these critiques is it shifts to the idea of assuming they're correct and these models are flawed, people are in harm's way and being harmed because of it. People are missing job interviews because they're inaccurately assessed. People are being judged incorrectly and either missing opportunities or being penalized in some way. And on the face of it, I understand that kind of concern, right? And I don't want to go too far down the technological rabbit hole because we do that every other episode. But this was something that jumped out to me and I want to get some thoughts on. So, last thing from the Kate Crawford interview, okay? They asked her if this is broken, how do you fix it? And she says, more so than ethics, we need to be focusing on who benefits most from these systems and if we are empowering already powerful institutions, major companies.
Like Amazon and whatnot, conglomerate government, things of that nature. If we're, if we're giving a super weapon to somebody who shouldn't use it, which I feel is, is maybe a solid point, even if coming from a place I don't quite understand or agree with that concept of, I don't want some crazy, super powerful tool to fall into the wrong hands. It's a pretty universal concept. I assume we can all agree with, uh, Alan Hume is doing incredibly important and necessary work on the ethics front. It's a cornerstone of the existence of Hume AI is working on establishing the ethics. What do you think about this idea that we need to regulate the hands, these powerful tools fall into more so than establishing the ethics or is that hand in hand? I just, I, again, you are the guy I would talk to about this. So I'm just lucky that that's the show we have. Yeah. I mean, I think that we need guidelines for how this technology is going to be used. It doesn't make sense to have like a blanket ban. And I think if you're going to ban, you know, expression recognition, that's sort of the, maybe less invasive than things like language recognition, right? If somebody knows what you're saying or where you are, you're like location, like GPS or, or like, uh, facial expression recognition, I think these things maybe have, uh, even deeper privacy implications, but at the same time, you know, all of these things are regulated and should be regulated, uh, with expression recognition. It's, it's, it's very, um, it's a very complex issue figuring out like, what are the right use cases? So one of the things we decided upfront when we started Hume is that we should have a separate nonprofit called the human initiative, uh, that would bring together AI researchers and ethicists and legal experts and social scientists who actually have the right mix of expertise to think about how this technology should and shouldn't be used. And so we did that and they've come up with specific use cases and guidelines and principles that we now have publicly online around use cases like. Accessibility. So giving people who are hard of hearing, uh, the, the ability to see in captions, how things are being expressed, um, or being able to people who. As speaking disabilities, uh, who will, who want to express their emotions and their voice can do that with prosody, um, health and wellness applications. So.
We now use those guidelines when we review applications for Hume. So we do think that's really important. Thank you for that. Let's keep the ball spinning here. I want to pivot a little bit. I said we were going to talk about Darwin. And I want to go to another piece that I read. There was this article on scientificamerican.com. And I pulled a couple of bits here that I'm going to read from that for you guys. So there's two parts I'm going to do. But real quick, just for our listeners out there, I'm only reading excerpts from this. But Decker and Allen were obviously given links to everything to review and pull before today's chat. So I don't feel I'm intentionally isolating things out of context to elicit a specific response or anything like that. I want the actual smart people in the room to talk. But I also want to give you guys some context out there listening in. So I'm just going to read these two bits for you. The first one here comes from that article. Darwin's expression, referring to his book, The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals, suggests that instances of a particular emotion, such as anger, share a distinct, immutable physical cause or state and essence that makes the instances similar, even if they have superficial differences. So we're talking about essentialism here. They go on to say, essentialism likewise appears to lure designers of emotion AI systems to follow Darwin down this comfortable path with its assumption that emotions evolved via natural selection to serve important functions. But if you actually read expression, you'll find that Darwin barely mentioned natural selection. He also did not write that facial expressions are functional products of evolution. In fact, he wrote the opposite, that smiles, frowns, eye widening, and other physical expressions were, quote, purposeless, unquote, vestigial movements that no longer serve a function. He made the statement more than 10 times in expression. Now, I'm done reading the bit there.
I'm woefully ill-equipped to respond to this in any meaningful way beyond simply going, fair enough. But I feel Darwin, saying that Darwin thought expressions to be purposeless is kind of a bombshell statement. So I got to believe you guys have some thoughts here. So I'm going to turn it around to the smart people to respond to that idea because I don't know where to fall on that one. I mean, I have to look up the actual quote in Expression of Emotion in Man and Animals because he definitely doesn't say that expressions are purposeless in the sense that's meant there. What he argues in this entire book is that expressions have no practical purpose other than being expressions, other than a communicative purpose and that they've evolved from things that at one point had a practical purpose and now only have a communicative purpose. As Darwin goes on to say, expressions are extremely important in developing social relationships and well-being and all of that. I have to find the exact... Yeah, he says, the movements of expression in the face and body, whatever their origin may be or may have been, are in themselves of much importance for our welfare. They serve as the first means of communication between the mother and her infant. She smiles approval and thus encourages her child on the right path or frowns disapproval. We readily perceive sympathy in others by their expression. Our sufferings are thus mitigated and our pleasures increased and mutual good feeling is thus strengthened. The movements of expression give vividness and energy to our spoken words. They reveal the thoughts and intentions of others more truly than do words, which may be falsified. So, I mean, it's very clear that that's not a correct reading of Darwin. Okay, real quick, can I... I'm just going to pat myself on the back. Feel free to tap that little advanced 30 seconds button, listener, if you don't want to hear me talk about how smart I feel right now, but here we go. Because when I was reading that, I was reminded of all the conversations we've had on this show and how you told me about the ideas, if you go back hundreds of thousands of years, one could detect imminent danger in their tribe based on the expression or behavior of a neighbor or the warnings of aggression or even something like outwardly displaying sadness as a means of attracting support of another. And so while I'm reading it, I'm like, but they aren't purposeless. I've heard that they've served a purpose.
And so I was really struggling with this. I was like, but it's Darwin. So if he said it, maybe they are. I don't know. So that I mean, I suppose I could have read his book, but this is so much more fun for me to talk to you and have you read it to me. In fact, Alan, if we can get a series, I don't know how the rights work on this of you just reading Darwin books. I'm sure other people have narrated them, but I'd love to hear you do it for me. But anyway, yeah, Decker, you know, you're a guy who I feel like has done a little digging in into Darwin. And maybe I'm wrong in that assumption, but I feel like that's kind of your bag. Will we ever sometimes when I have people tell me what they think Darwin thought, I kind of think of like like the dinosaurs, like, well, we know what they look like, but we don't because we weren't there when they were there. We'll never really know. It's a best guess. But I think in this instance, I would assume he's left us enough text for us to interpret that we can get pretty close to what he thought, even though we can't ask him ourselves. Is this something that's forever going to be debatable or can you say, as someone who's who's looked into a lot of them, read a lot of, if not all the text, that there is enough there for us to have a pretty solid idea of what he thought? Yeah, I think, you know, first of all, you know, well, Darwin, Darwin was a an incredible letter writer and autobiographer and correspondent and had different notebooks that led to the expression of emotion in man and animals. So it is they're all available online and we could provide that link so you can find out what he said. More specifically, the expression of emotion in man and animals is, I think the if there's no doubt in human history, it is the most precise, nuanced description of 59 states, right? 59 mental states or physical mental states in which he describes very specific behaviors from multiple kinds of data that co-vary with those states. So, you know, you can go right to what Darwin said and see how he differentiates horror from terror, anger from rage, different kinds of love, et cetera. So it's if that is, you know, then you can contest what the words mean.
Empathy meant something a little bit different in Victorian England than it may mean today, et cetera. Love, it means something a little bit different. So you can resolve these issues. And on that, it is clear throughout the expression of emotion in man and animals, Darwin talks about what we know today, both in the non-human signaling literature, the human signaling literature that these expressions help us know other people's mental states and coordinate social interactions. They help rivals solve conflicts, they help parents connect to their children, they help people flirt with each other, et cetera. And then the second thing, your first point about essences is not Darwin. It is just, that is assuming that Paul Ekman's photos, and it'd be worth our listeners looking at those photos, because those are in some sense what you might think of as essences, but if you look at the static photos of very specific facial muscle movements, that wasn't Darwin. That was Paul Ekman. He hadn't read Darwin when he went and did that research, right? So people, the contemporary critique of Darwin is mistaking those photos from Darwin, because what Darwin writes about is what Allen has discovered, and every study of expression has discovered, is within a category, you have a lot of variation, right? In pride, you have all these different forms of pride, the hands go up or they don't, the chest is up, you sneer with contempt or not, whatever it is. And so, those are just regrettable misinterpretations, and it's back to this point. There's this science of emotion that's making a lot of progress, and then there are these theoretical disputes that tend to kind of cycle and flow in the swing of a pendulum. And it comes out, and I don't want to keep saying the same thing over and over again, I got other stuff I'm going to get us to, but I'm just trying, whenever I approach two sides of a debate here, I try my best to get onto the other side and understand where this position is coming from, right? And I keep taking issue with the dismissiveness, the saying it's purposeless and all the other things, and like I said earlier, drawing too hard a line in the sand. I would assume that there's a lot of people that are going to be saying, well, I'm not going to be able to do this, I'm not going to be able to do that, I'm not going to be able to do that. 
Obviously, you guys, you disagree with those viewpoints. You can articulate that very clearly to me of why it is the way it is, but can either of you more clearly articulate for me what exactly is their argument against the significance of facial expressions? Why they look at the studies you guys have put forward, had peer-reviewed and go, not good enough. What is it that I'm missing as a lay person that they are taking issue with beyond just the misinterpretation of a Darwin piece, but to look at the work you guys have done and then say, it's not good enough. People are still, it's failing here. It's doing this. It's not doing that. Help Normie over here understand why that science person is upset with this science person, if you can, is that possible? Well, I mean, part of it goes back to, and I think it's another non sequitur in reasoning and Alan pointed at an earlier one, one earlier, which is that there is a view of emotion that it's all constructed with language and symbols and cultural meanings. And that no doubt is true. There's a lot that's constructed or a good deal. I would challenge a lot of convincing evidence and happy to consider that. But yeah, there's a, that view has always historically been hostile to the idea that there are bodily reactions to emotion that may be part of human nature, if you will, or mammalian nature, which was the Darwinian enterprise. And if you can show that that's not the case, which is the spirit of these so-called reviews, then you get to, it logically follows in that view that, oh, it must all be constructed and all studies show, like it's both. There are amazing cultural variations, amazing. And then there's a core there that's universal. That's part of what I think is going on. Yeah. There's a great New Yorker piece that we're going to get to in a second. I think that kind of highlights the cultural variations that I found really, really interesting. But real quick before we do that, and this kind of gets us there, if we start at this point, we'll end up there, talking about universality or the universal nature of these expressions. How do we know rather expressions are universal or not?
I would cite as anecdotal evidence, the thing I referenced earlier, animation, right? Those films get redubbed and distributed globally. And yes, the language changes, but they wouldn't make the billions of dollars that they do, if people didn't connect beyond with just the words that are being said, right? There is something visual there. And again, there's a ton of things that go into an animated film, the framing, the lighting, the color palette, all that stuff. But they are connecting with characters. There's a reason people all over the world get tattoos of Bart Simpson or Buzz Lightyear. There's something about the characters that they connect to and they relate to. Something that, even though they're not real, feels real to them, and they love those things. So that, to me, very anecdotal, not scientific at all, but that, to me, is some kind of inkling that there is a universal language here, be it expressions, emotions, there's something that we're all getting. But how do we know if expressions are universal? That's the big question that we wrote in our notes that I was building towards. Alan? Yeah, I mean, there's different sources of evidence, right? There's comparisons to animals. That would be one source. Oh, I love that. We've talked all about that in this podcast. That's right. So, you know, wolves growl and dogs growl, and we understand what the growl means. It's an anger display. It turns out that the growl is an authentic anger display in the sense that the more convincing and deep of a growl you're able to make, you have to have a bigger lung capacity. So it's actually a show of body size. And a lot of animals have a sound similar to that they make. That's a threat display, at least a lot of mammals. There's, you know, the scream. You see alarm calls in different primates that have similar acoustic properties. There's sort of laugh displays, the open mouth smile, which is a play behavior in almost every mammal there is. So there's that kind of evidence. There's evidence looking at infants. So, you know, before they have much time to learn about expressions, do they react in a way that shows that, you know, they have some understanding of expressions. And there's studies that show at a very, very young age, a matter of like, I don't know,
You know, four months or some three months, four months, um, when you're doing this paradigm where the infant is crossing and it must be after they're crawling, I don't know. Different studies at different ages, but one is, um, when they're crawling, you can do this study where they're crossing a glass bridge. And um, if the parents on the other side of the bridge and they're making, you know, a neutral face or a scared face, the kid won't cross it. And when they're smiling, the kid will cross. Right? So they're making expressions as, as signals at a very young age. Wow. That's cool. It's evidence like that. Um, there's another reason to have a kid. I'm just making a list and that's a good one. I can run glass bridge experiments with child writing that down. That's, that's a fun one right there. Yeah. I mean, and the more obvious one is in the voice, right? You need chastise a baby or a dog, you know, it's very clear, it shows signs of shame when you laugh and have an encouraging voice and speak in parentese to them, then it's an encouraging sign. Okay. So that's infants, animals, and then also cross cultures. And the cross-cultural studies are in some ways most difficult. You can look at, you know, large scale cross-cultural studies like the kind that we do where we actually just get people in the US and China and India and Venezuela and Ethiopia and South Africa to label lots of expressions, to form lots of expressions, to label what their own expressions mean, to report what they're feeling in a given situation. We do all these studies and we measure how similar things are across cultures and usually it's, you know, between 60 and 80%. It's shared across cultures along many, many dimensions, like 25 different dimensions of expression in each study. And then you can look at natural data. So we've done studies where we look at YouTube videos all around the world and we label everybody's expression, the facial expressions and all of the YouTube videos and the context that's going on. We do all that with machine learning. Yes. I was going to ask a question and this kind of goes in the New Yorker thing. I don't want to interrupt you, but this New Yorker piece that I found very interesting that I was going to ask you to kind of set up because I don't know that I fully understood it, but now we're here. So you talk about looking at the video.
And we talk about labeling those expressions. And one of the things that I think was kind of touched upon in this piece is who did you use to train and label those pieces, right? Because they kind of get into those videos. I mean, in this piece that like, I may label a video as a different emotion than someone of a different culture and in a different part of the world, which is why I mentioned my Western bias earlier, is because that was something that kind of like, not blew my mind, but got me to think a little more of like, okay, fair enough. When I think of these things, I have to remind myself that my worldview is limited by what I've seen of the world and the culture I've been raised within. So I understand that and I recognize other cultures exist. But I also, again, I go back to that thing of like, Buzz Lightyear is cool in every language, man. Everybody loves Buzz. So I don't know where it lands. But when you were labeling and going through and identifying all those things, did you guys account for that kind of Western, the labeling bias, right? Are you ensuring that you're labeling it in a way that accounts for that? I'm sorry that I'm not very articulate in this question, but I think I got the point across. So, yeah, there's two issues there. One is how do people in different cultures label expressions? And we've done big studies of that, right? Separate studies and along 28 different dimensions, which are significant that people distinguish in facial expression, 63% of the variance is preserved. So, if you look at a major culture, a major country like US, China, the labels won't be that different. In that study where we looked at facial expressions in YouTube videos, we didn't use human labelers. We used a machine learning algorithm and that algorithm was trained on human labels. And it actually, this is where it's a point of confusion. In order to train an algorithm, you sort of need to use emotion terms because people aren't good at describing expressions in any other way, right? And so, we used labels and it happened to be from Indian graders who were asked to use their naive understanding of expression to label the emotions that they thought were...
raçãoção de muitas e muitas diferentes faças. E então treinamos um algoritmo que só viu os pixels no rosto para tentar gerar esses mesmos labelos, mas desde então o algoritmo só viu pixels no rosto, não entendeu o contexto cultural, o contexto ao redor do rosto, como diferentes pessoas em diferentes culturas labelavam a expressão. Então esses labelos acabaram sendo só proxias para as dimensões do movimento facial. Todo o algoritmo foi privilegiado para o movimento facial e não tinha uma interpretação do que significavam esses movimentos faciais. E então nós... Humanos! Sim. Legal. E então nós mesuramos movimentos faciais e os convertimos diretamente em contextos. E então outro tipo de algoritmo de aprendizagem de máquinas que mostramos não foi sensível à expressão, labelou o contexto que as pessoas estavam, se elas estavam assistindo fogueiras num casamento ou num aniversário, etc. E então nós correlamos essas coisas. Então a expressão facial em termos de movimentos faciais com labelos só como proxias, certo? Porque não importa qual cultura esses movimentos faciais estão, eles vão ser labelados do mesmo jeito e comparados com o contexto. Então, sim, é assim que você associa essas duas questões. Agora nós temos algoritmos onde nós actualmente usamos labelos de diferentes culturas para treinar o algoritmo e ver se podemos conseguir mais expressões faciais que são mais cultura-específicas. Então, parece que com o nosso algoritmo de expressão facial, por exemplo, há 21 que são quase exatamente o mesmo significado em cada cultura, 21 diferentes dimensões de expressão facial, e há 7 que são um pouco mais cultura-específicas. Alguns deles são muito cultura-específicos, mas a maioria deles tem similaridades em quatro ou cinco das seis culturas que estudamos. E então nós conseguimos capturar as dimensões universales ou compartilhadas e cultura-específicas de expressão facial e desassociá-las. Mas no final do dia, é apenas medir o movimento facial. Sim, porque no final do dia, não importa a cultura, todos nós temos o mesmo conjunto de ferramentas aqui. Sim, todos nós temos os mesmos músculos faciales. Exatamente, exatamente. O que você disse, 21, 22 são geralmente universais? 21 dimensões têm quase exatamente o mesmo significado em todos os Estados Unidos, China, Venezuela, Etiópia.
South Africa and India. an argument for basic emotions, probably the most cited paper in emotion, the science of emotion. He says, look, it's an open field. If you find a state that has an experience, that has a sign of expressive behavior, that has a pattern of thinking, that has some physiology to it, that may, that you might be able to, in the Darwinian sense, observe in other species, we'll call that an emotion. And that's what this kind of work does, is it says, whoa, there's this rich palette of emotions that the field can, as Alan's been doing in others, explore. So just to, I would say that. Awesome. Amazing. Alan, before I, because we're coming into the home stretch and I got one more thing that I wanted to get to, but in that conversation, we kind of tackled a lot of what I would consider like the meat of that New Yorker piece. But what, did I steamroll anything that you wanted to get into there? Because I think it was like you or Janet had sent me the link to that piece. And I just did, I wanted to make sure I didn't take away any time from you to speak to anything that you saw in that piece that you wanted to address. But I think we... Yeah. I mean, I really liked the piece despite, you know, I don't think it's a scientist who wrote it, but they have a very strong intuitive understanding of like, well, when I talk to people in different cultures and somebody who does that a lot, you know, and we don't have the same emotion word for something, it's very easy to figure out what's meant by the word. It takes a very small, like short amount of time to impart what the concept is actually describing. And there's instantly a recognition of, oh, I know that feeling. Right. And so, is it really a culture-specific feeling or is it just a culture-specific term? And the conclusion is it's a culture-specific term. And I agree with that largely. You know, and I liked the piece too, a lot. And I admire Boccia Moschita's work, whose book...
The book, the piece is based on, and that's a really important point that's often overlooked that the great Irish philosopher Edmund Burke made, which is that words don't necessarily refer to feelings, right? And so, we have our single words as often as the case in this science. And so, when you hear about the Japanese state of amai, one word that refers to the pleasurable dependence upon other people, at first blush, you're like, well, we don't have a word for that in English. But then once you start to think about phrases or images or metaphors and you start, oh yeah, I've felt that, I feel pleasurably dependent upon a grandparent or whatever it is. So, I loved how the piece ends with, yeah, you may not have this direct translation across languages of single words, but we can understand each other. Yeah. Yeah. That's what I took away from it too. And I really liked that because at the end of the day, it's like, if we try, we can find the common ground, even though it may appear as though it's not there. It's there. We've got to look for it. All right. Last thing before we wrap this up, you know, and allow me to belabor my animation example, but one more time, but this I'm going to go the other direction, okay? Not devil's advocate, but you know, I mentioned what are the tools, right? And we said vocal performance, body language, let's keep going. The music, the color palette, the framing of the character within the scene. There are tons of ways to visually communicate emotion beyond just facial expressions, right? You look at the first half of WALL-E, three nonverbal characters tell a complete story without proper faces. They have eyes, but no faces. And there's tons of examples in the pop culture of us communicating without faces, taking up the challenge to tell that story without a face and without a traditional human form is always a fun thing that an animator does. So all of that is to get me to, if it's so contentious, if there's this endless debate over the significance and purpose of expressions, why is that where the emotion science field has hung its hat? Why set up camp on facial expressions? From my outside perspective, the most controversial element, because everyone else seems to agree on the other stuff, but everyone's debating.
How did we land there as sort of like the base for all of this? Where does that come from? Does it go right back to Ekman? Does it go back to Darwin? Why that? Why facial expressions if it's such a debate? I think that it's just, you have this historical legacy, it's always been debated, so that precedent justifies publications about more debate. I think a lot of the field has, is not concerned too much about the debate and is measuring expression and advancing in different ways. There are a lot of labs that are keeping up the work. And so I think that it has this historical legacy that we've talked about. And then it's splashy to critique Ekman, who became very well-known. One of the most well-known psychologists for, had a television show based on him, his life, etc. So, it's a way to gain prominence. Yeah, I would also add, I think that it has a lot to do with the medium through which science is disseminated. I think the fact that especially in the old days, you could not send a recording. Like you had, it was in a journal article, how would they possibly write about sound, right? And so, now we have the internet, but even so, it's difficult. And so, there were a lot of books where there were diagrams of the face and there was kind of a pseudoscience of physiognomy about how your face shape indicate your personality and just an obsession with the face. And Darwin was able to sketch out facial expressions in man and animals. How would he, you know, he talks about sound, he talks about vocalizations, but he can't do it with the same level of detail, right? He can't actually show examples. And so, I think that's true in other areas of science as well. I think that there's been an obsession with more visual stuff than audio stuff and that's a shame. And I think that's changing. I mean, we had this study with vocal expressions where we had this interactive map that we sent around and you can play through all the different vocal expressions.
And suddenly, a lot of people are a lot more interested in vocal expressions, so we'll see where that goes. I think we're headed in a good direction. It's interesting, you know, Matt, like Ekman's photos, he developed these photos out of 3000 pictures, they're so easy to use, you can put them in a suitcase, you can put them in your backpack and go do a study. You know, sound equipment's different. You know, early studies, like when you look at the spectrograph, which is the representation of sound for an emotion, good luck analyzing it. It's like, you know, and you're like, what do I do with this? So it just was harder to do, you know, but there's a lot of progress being made. And it may prove, some people have made the case, Alan's data, our data, speak to the possibility that the voice may be the richer register of human emotion. And that may be an interesting development to come out of this cycle of debate. So cool. All right, I'm going to say goodbye, but real quick, because you brought it up, my wife and I, we loved Lie to Me, the show. It was a show that was on Fox, I think, years ago, whatever, Tim Roth played him, it was procedural, but it was great television and we were obsessed with that show. Real quick, did Ekman like the show? Did he like what they did? Oh, you're putting me in a hot seat here. You know what, tell me off camera. No, no, he liked it. He liked, I think, the first season and then he felt that it went downhill. It did what every TV show does. Yeah, but he liked it. You know what I mean? That's awesome. Fantastic. That was for me, that question. And I appreciate you indulging. Gentlemen, I can pepper you with questions and compliments for another hour if they'd let me, but it's time to put a bow on this one and call it a day. As per usual, I am overflowing with gratitude and appreciation. You both have very busy schedules, so I appreciate when any time you can make the time to hang out and humor me. My curiosities, it means a lot. Dacher, cannot say it enough, a pleasure to the max. One more time, your latest book, Awe, The New Science of Everyday Wonder and How It Can Transform Your Life, is available for pre-order right now, wherever you get your books. Anything else you want to mention before we get out of here, Dacher? It's great to be with you guys. I love these conversations. I love it, man. Alan, I said it before, I'll say it again. Episodes and conversations like this are great.
awe god so much love on this show. And of course to our audience, we didn't forget about you. I don't get to sit here and ask my questions. If you don't keep showing up to listeners. So thank you for making this all possible for us. I hope you come back for another one and Hey, look, we took a swing and made the attempt here to talk through some pretty big ideas and positions out there right now. I am sure someone has a counterpoint or a different perspective. And that's cool. You're human. Do it. Go ahead and send us an email. Let us know we want to hear it. Let's start a dialogue. We're all people out here trying our best. Keep the conversations going. It's how we all get better. You can find us at the feelings lab at hume.ai. That's T H E F E E L I N G S. L A B at you know, a little squiggly guy. Hume H U M E dot A I. Farewell for now from all of us at the feelings lab. I'm Matt Forte. Thanks again, everybody. And please stay safe out there.
