Hello world, what is up? Welcome back to the Feelings Lab. I'm your host Matt Forte and for today's episode, we're talking about aesthetic appreciation and fine art. This is a topic I've been itching to get back into ever since we had Richard Karras from NVIDIA on to tackle digital art. Today we'll explore another facet of that conversation and looking at the rapidly evolving fine art community. The ways we as humans create, share and appreciate art have simultaneously evolved over the years while remaining largely unchanged since our fingers first pressed pigment onto the cave walls. To this day, across all generations, the most impactful art elicits an emotional response. It communicates or perhaps even challenges a point of view. Art is inherently subjective. Beauty is in the eye of the beholder. One man's trash is another man's million dollar exhibit, so on and so forth. But what happens when we start to tweak ever so slightly some of the traditionally held beliefs surrounding art? If a human being is not directly responsible for the production of said piece, is that art? What happens if the preference for AI-generated art exceeds that of traditional human-produced work? If a piece exists solely in the digital realm as a collection of ones and zeros, does that increase or decrease its value? Between AI, PFPNFTs, DeFi, GAN Networks, AICAN and a host of other acronyms, I promise you, I am not making up. The world of fine art, like most societal constructs and subcultures these days, is on the precipice of monumental change. In fact, I think we're probably well past the precipice at this point. Post-precipice, if you will. One such company at the forefront of this shift, incidentally, also sits at the crossroads of the old, guard and new, making both the traditional and unconventional worlds of fine art not only infinitely more accessible, but also joyful for all. Connecting collectors with the artists and artwork they love, that company, of course, is Artsy. Joining us today from Artsy, we have a phenomenal guest that I'm really excited to bring on in just a moment.
But first, a fine how do you do to my co-host, CEO, and chief scientist for Hume AI, Dr. Alan Cowan is back with me. Alan, welcome back to the show. How are you doing, bud? Doing great. Thanks, Matt. Awesome, man. It's good to see you again. Fantastic. As for today's guest, throughout their career, they've worked with the likes of Apple, American Express, and most recently, the very cool aforementioned Artsy, a self-proclaimed lover of new technologies and more so making them accessible to non-geeks. I'm thrilled to have her on the show, Senior Director of Engineering at Artsy, the great Kathy Tafel is here. Kathy, hello to you. How are you doing? I am doing fine. It is finally spring here in Berlin. That means we've got a little bit more light in our universe and that also affects your emotions as you know. Awesome. Well, we too over here in New York cannot wait for the warmer months. It's like fake spring right now where it's beautiful and sunny, but still a tad too chilly for my liking. Alan, I want to start with you as we often do on the emotion side of this thing. I was literally just yesterday made aware of this incredible Google Arts and Culture project you and Dacker worked on. I'm almost mad you didn't tell me sooner. Almost. But my understanding, and you keep me honest here, you guys asked 1,300 people to describe how 1,500 paintings make them feel by choosing from different words and stuff like that. The process that you went through, this would yield, I don't know, like 25 different emotions that people linked to the artwork. Then you, as you and the Hume team are wanted to do, plotted these feelings on a map, an interactive map that people can go right now and look at. There's a paper out there. The data is currently under review, but one of my questions was, and I know this may seem a little on the nose, but I swear I wrote this long before I knew how well-equipped you were to answer it, but what do we know about what art makes us feel, how it makes us feel? How is that different from spontaneous emotion? Whatever you've learned, not just in that study or what you know as being a generally very smart man, tell me what you know about our emotional relationship with art. Yeah. That study you mentioned is basically the first quantitative examination at that scale of the feelings of a book by art. We learned, we confirmed that.
And basically, the art evokes really complex and profound feelings, not just the ones that you register, sort of facial expression and the voice every day, like joy and sadness and confusion, but also really aesthetically complex, nuanced experiences, like whether something is intricate or whimsical or disorienting, they go well beyond everyday emotional expression. And you know, these aren't critics, these are just regular people, and they can reliably identify 25 different dimensions of emotional experience that are evoked by artwork. So there are things that are really profound, like spiritual, psychedelic, mysterious, elegant, and go way beyond hedonism, beyond everyday emotion, more elevated, profound expressions and feelings. And this will ring true to people who appreciate art, probably, but it really hasn't been characterized by science. So I would say it goes so far as to say like science hasn't really explored this realm of emotional aesthetic experience very much. And this study is the first to offer, I would say, quantitative evidence that art has this unique power. And it's unique because it's different from ordinary means of expressing ourselves through the face, through the voice, through language, to evoke a really wide range of profound feelings. And the ones that a lot of them are the ones that art appreciators talk about. And we've mapped these out for the first time, with the help of Google Arts and Culture and paintings from around the world, from thousands of years of human history, and anyone can peruse the map on the art emotions map section of the Google Arts and Culture website. Yeah, that the maps publicly available, right, we can put a link to it in the show notes so people can go check it out, because I was getting lost in it yesterday. And it was just blowing my mind. It was so much fun. Real quick, what was since this is like the first time that we sort of have this quantitative, like data and analysis, what was something was there something that surprised you once the data started coming back? Like, what were your expectations? And were they met or blown away? Kind of thing? Yeah. So I mean, we normally look at a really wide range of emotions, and people already identify a much wider range of emotions and facial expressions and the voice than science had really studied. And this goes beyond that. We were curious, does art go even further? Does it get captured in more nuance, even more?
It has this capability of capturing this much nuance and kind of profundity in everyday experience and bringing it out and kind of showing you this representation in different forms. Wow. All right. Well, there's a lot in there to unpack, and I'm sure a lot of that's going to inform some of the questions as we go along here as well. But very exciting. So my notes here, there's a paper that's under review, right? Is that what's going on right now? So there's... Yeah, we have a paper under review, but people can explore the map, which is... Which was launched a few months ago and yeah, we expect the paper to get some attention probably. Very, very cool. All right. When that happens, we'll do another one of those bonus episodes and I'll just throw a billion questions at you. Cathy, I was reading your bio and you open with a line that I really like. It says, I like being a part of making big things happen in technology that make the world a better place for regular people. Beautiful sentiment. And so before we get lost in the weeds of what makes art art and in the role AI plays and all of that, I just love to know first, what brought you to artsy and what excites you about the work that you get to do over there? Sure. So I think what we just heard from Alan about the profundity and the wide range of human culture is actually what drew me to this subject matter. As a technologist, of course, I can put my brain and my intellect to almost any facet of society and amplify it with technology. And at this point in my career, just looking at where the world is, I really want to ask what do we need more of in this world? And moreover, what am I actually good at helping with?
And so those intersections are interesting to play with. I had a little bit of, oh, I should do something about climate change because I want to leave the world a better place for my child. And you know what? Honestly, I don't have a lot to say about transportation and there's some much deeper minds on transport than my own. However, I do have a wealth of knowledge from having started my career in the music industry and helped get to tools in the hands of ordinary people that you used to need a $50,000 studio for all the way to Apple and just like really getting frustrated when people say, oh, I'm not creative or the computer, there's something wrong with the computer. I can't make it do what I want. And that really propelled me a lot early in my career to solve some of those problems. But ultimately, it's all in service of who we are as humans and how can we move the cultural conversation forward? And this is what I really love about Artsy. We've got this really wonderful editorial staff, a curatorial staff that works with our galleries and has an opinion about culture. And this is what I'm in it for. This is what the game is for me. Yeah. I want to come back in just a moment to the curating staff and the staff that you have there. But first, I want to call out this awesome through line with what you just mentioned, your career of putting those tools in the hands of those that didn't have it before. We talk so much all the time on this podcast about the democratization of be it filmmaking or music production or just all of these disciplines and today very much about how Artsy is bringing the art community and art collection to the masses in a way that hasn't been done before. And it's just really awesome to see that through line in your career of living that mantra of taking technology and making it something really easy for people to use and appreciate. I think that's awesome. Let's get into the curation team because I'm always curious about the ways services are and aren't incorporating AI into the workflow. So I was reading and my understanding is that every Artsy member
Each member has access to the artsy specialists who come from auction houses, galleries, museums, and they are actual human beings uniquely equipped to help you find art within your price range and match your tastes and all that sort of stuff. I understand why we have people doing that, but it also, in all the things we're talking about, it feels like a job that's ripe for a recommendation engine or something that AI could jump in and help with. I'm wondering about the balance or why the decision to keep the human element there, or if there's AI being employed, all that stuff. I'm really curious. I'd love to hear you talk about it. Sure. Well, I went back in time with the help of Sarah Hack, who's one of our machine learning engineers. She pointed me to GitHub repo that has been around for six years. We've been doing machine learning at Artsy for at least that long, if not longer, in a different place. So, you will find that sort of how we sort things is based on a recommendation engine. And it's not that... You have to be at a certain budget to really take most advantage of our advisory team. And at the same time, we think that right now, we're AI, and by AI, we mean machine learning. And by machine learning, we mean neural nets at a certain level of depth. What they can do right now is amplify our own biases as humans. And you can see this on some of the poorer sides of AI and machine learning and neural nets, where you train things on just white skin, and then people can't have their soap dispensed by an electronic sensor. And I think you're helping to fix that as well, which is wonderful. So, we're amplifying bias. And so, what we're biasing right now and what we're amplifying are these editors and these curators. And so, we've got, I think, millions of pieces of art and hundreds of thousands of artists and many, many, many users. And I think if you calculate the intersection of all of that, it would be like 12 trillion interactions. And there's no way that any human is going to make sense of that. Wow. Exactly.
Exactly. So, you talked about art being big data, it's actually big data. And this is where we at Artsy just love as technologists to be able to come in, play with this data. You know, one of the first things that we did is we made this thing called the Genome Project. And so, this is one of the first things that we use to help us sort algorithmically what you get to see in front of you. Wow. Yeah. So, we've been at it for a while. But at the same time, I think that you can also get into this kind of uncanny valley with AI where it just, it's almost there and it almost is right. But there's just something off about it. And that's where if we bring in this curatorial and human element, then we kind of avoid that uncanny valley. And I think that kind of... Oh, Alan, did you want to say something? Because I had a question. No, I just wanted to build on that idea of amplification because it reminds me of we were talking a few episodes back about medical diagnosis as kind of data processing. So, a really expensive form of data processing, we have to bring in a radiologist or whoever to look at this data. And it's not that bringing in AI is going to replace the radiologist. No, because the radiologist is only reaching a small fraction of the population that needs that review. What you're doing is you're making it cheap enough for the radiologist to scale that process. You're creating a funnel for review, you're creating ways of extending their judgments to multiple things that enable more people to be reached by that. I think that's basically what's happening here as well. It's an interior radiologist, the art curator, editor, or a critic who's basically able to... And I think they contribute a lot to being able to understand what the tradition of a given artistic style or form is and emotions conveyed and where it belongs in the broader taxonomy of art and being able to scale their expertise using AI. I think that's really cool. Yeah, super cool. And I think in there is the answer to my next question, but I really wanted to ask this because I heard about this yesterday and I got super excited. Okay, this is gonna sound crazy, but our executive producer, she has a very close friend who's an artist, right? And their pieces sell for thousands and...
And I'm curious, have you guys had to walk a line of matching people with the right pieces and also building a more inclusive platform so everyone's able to buy, but then also still catering to those clients who have like very specific needs and requests? Like, how do you, is that where the human element comes in essentially? Because it's just, there's so many things to kind of parse to make sure you're matching the right things. Sure. Yeah. And so this is actually, you're bringing up some part of the art world that I had no idea until I joined Artsy. I was much more of an aficionado. I do have some pieces, but I am by no means, you know, New York gallery maven. And there are some pieces and artists are like, well, I need to have a certain caliber of buyer for my artwork to remain at the worth. Right. And so one of the things that we're working on with the collection part of our app is a way for you to show your collector resume to a gallery so they can see that you do have these pieces, etc. So this is something that I think we just launched on the app and we'll come to the web later. But it is again, to try to democratize this transaction. Yeah. It's so cool to kind of figure out a solution to that, right. To walk that line where you open the doors for everybody, but make sure that the needs of the culture and the business are still being met and that the things are happening. It's the perfect blend of old and new, right? It is. It is. Our CEO talks about having walked into a gallery after having just had an exit from his former company and just not really feeling welcome. And so that's what we really want to make sure is that the artwork can become more welcoming. Yeah. I think I was just...
Mike Steebe. Am I saying that right? Yeah. I was just reading an interview he did with Business Insider and he was talking about that experience as well. And he was talking about the transparency and pricing is one of the big groundbreaking things that you wouldn't expect, but it is. It's a huge deal because for years in the physical realm, you'd walk into a gallery or something and you'd fall in love with a piece and you wouldn't even know what the price was or if it was available at all, or you'd find out it is available and it's way outside your budget. And so just having that transparency has been such a huge deal. And talking about how important the price is and just knowing the price and how one arrives at the price, is AI leveraged at all in terms of analyzing a piece and offering an appropriate quote, or is that still a uniquely human process as well? I think that, well, I think again, with the amplification side of things, I think we can begin to like, we just have this artsy price database, which has recent auction results. And this is something where you can begin to map that to your collection and so on. But it is still one of these things that you have very sparse data and you can extrapolate, but you might not want to have that be your only data point. Like for instance, if a piece of art only changes hands three times in a century, it might not be enough data to draw a conclusion from about the value of something. You hope it's exchanged hands at least one time though. Wow. I just love that three times, just having the log, the data log of knowing for where this thing has been physically for over a hundred years. I'm just so used to the digital world. So when I entered the fine art world and they have these pieces that have existed for so long, it's kind of like the difference between traveling in America and then traveling in Europe, where it's like, oh, that church was built in 1922. And then you go and they're like, yeah, we have castles from forever ago over here. All right. So we're talking about one thing that always pops to mind when we talk about all the ways that AI is working, all these blending old and new. I think of subscription models. I think of Netflix. You have artists, you have your collectors owning the piece, showing it off and saying, this is mine. We should talk about changing
It's a podcast that spans very rarely, like three times over a century or something. It's very much a part of it. But as you democratize the process, as more people enter the culture, and as kids and adults that grew up in a world without physical media start to enter this world, do you guys, are you seeing a demand? Do you foresee a demand for some sort of subscription model where instead of buying a piece, somebody comes in and says, I'm going to, why pay $2,000 for one sculpture when I can pay half that? And every six months get a new piece to show off or something. Do you see any interest in that? Or is that something the opposite is happening? I'm curious. I don't really see like, we don't see demand. Granted, we have a very conservative audience. And, you know, we're actually lucky that we began to take off and really scale when things needed to go a little virtual for the last two years. Otherwise, our market may not have shifted so much online as it has done in the last two years. So, I think that there's something, you know, if we talk about the emotions, I might want to ask about the emotions of ownership or the emotion of owning this moment. And I don't know if you want to share that necessarily with someone or what if they have a different moment and then it changes the art for you. So, I think that's a little bit more special. Now, you know, you talk about the changing hands and the ownership a little faster, you know, the NFT world is somewhere where things might change hands a little bit more frequently. And this is something where we're still looking just to see if there is an intersection of interest between the old and the new. So, the old collectors, the new collectors. So, we're dipping our feet into the waters, as you can see, a couple of auctions at the beginning of this year. And then we've got one coming up that benefits, I think it's Girls Who Code. Yes, I wrote that down. I thought that was really cool. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. And so, you know, you hear maybe just a little bit.
I have to be a little bit of cautiousness in my voice here because I, you know, as I went back to talking about at the beginning with my career, wanting to do something for climate change, there's been some real impact of some of the different currencies on the environment and something to be real about. And then I have to ask myself, then what about all of these deep learning AIs and the computational intense nature of them back when it was only 16 bit or 32 bit computing, the computers didn't take up that much energy, the results weren't as great, but it might have been better for the planet. I don't know. And right now, maybe we want to divest ourselves of fossil fuels for geopolitical reasons. And see this, and then you get into this conversations and then I can have this because I'm talking about art. And this is why I love and I come back and I still go back to why I love working where I'm at. It also reminds me of there's an episode of the show, The Good Place, where Maya Rudolph plays like this judge that exists independent of time and existence. And the judge doesn't understand why everyone's saying it's so hard to be good on earth. So, she goes back for a day and then she comes back and she's like, yeah, it is impossible to make an ethical decision at this point. It has gotten so complicated. It's like, even if I just buy an organic tomato, well, I don't necessarily know the practices of that farm or where it's from and the impact of their equipment. It was just like, so funny, because you're right. You talk about NFTs and this event, which sounds incredible for girls who code. But there's also, I was reading a ton of articles about the amount of energy required to sustain the blockchain and cryptocurrencies into mine and all that sort of stuff. And it's just so layered and complicated. Let's focus on the really cool part, which is, this is an event in support of Girls Who Code, an awesome cause, and it's featuring a selection of NFT-backed generative artwork by women and non-binary artists. And the reason I was really excited about that, not just because of the great benefit there, but also this is everything we're talking about, generative artwork, the NFT element. I'm curious.
We're talking about that for a second, you know, if you can speak to any of the trends you're seeing, is it the popularity and buzziness of NFTs? Is that making traditional art more or less popular? Have you seen anything like that? Or is it two separate groups, which I think is what you were just starting to say a moment ago? I think it hasn't had, we have yet to see anything that we could definitively say. It could be too soon. It could be too soon. I think it'll be too soon. And I think there's something to the generative art. And, you know, I've been around this area also many, many years. You know, a friend of mine who was in that first software business that I was in went on to make this program called Studio Artist, and it's one of the first tools that really used AI. So, we've had this around in our tool chest for a while. I like the generative art. I like there's another project called Electric Sheep, where, you know, you're voting on the screensaver aesthetics, some really fun, really fun projects. But has anybody made the living with selling that generative piece per se? I don't know yet. And maybe it's because it needed this certificate of authenticity. And maybe that's where this has the role to play. And then there are some pieces, you know, if we go back to awe, you know, like, I personally am not moved at all by a JPEG of a monkey. I don't know about you. Context is everything for me, Cathy. What's the monkey doing to you? Is the monkey wearing a little hat? Does it have a fake smile? Does it have a smile? So, this is where I say sometimes it's not my circus, not my monkeys. And then there's these pieces that are very hugely displayed. I mean, huge. And then you can have that sense of awe and coming into a relationship with that piece. And then it's not necessarily just digital on your piece. It's still very site-specific and time and place specific. And I think that's one of the things that creates these moments that we talk about that maybe people do want to capture or collect and the rarity of the expression.
And that really, there's a tension there between the copyability of digital versus the uniqueness of experience that people are after. Yeah, that's 100%. You talked about like the psychology of ownership. So yeah, no, I think that's spot on is that people have this idea of, I mean, Walter Benjamin called it the aura of like a given piece of art, if it's authentic that, you know, his argument was that photography is going to be the end of art because photography is mass reproducible. So it doesn't have this aura. I mean, that's sort of what NFTs are combating, right? It's basically like bringing this back to what is essentially photography, something that's easily mass reproducible, even more so than photography wasn't Walter Benjamin's day. And Paul Bloom talks in those early, early 20th century and Paul Bloom, who's a famous psychologist today talks about essentialism, psychology of essentialism and how, you know, that you need when an object is imbued with some sort of essence, we kind of establish a relationship with it. And it's almost like a pet, you know, and so there's something to owning a piece of art for that reason, and not wanting to kind of part with it. And so I think NFTs are trying to replicate some of that. And so there is something to be said for that, you know, on the other hand, somebody can literally copy paste the JPEG that the NFT is, you know, is attached to and you can use that in your Twitter profile picture, piss people off. It's funny, one of the things I was like, trying to figure out what the excitement is other than just the newness of it. And one of the things that they're seeing is like, especially with PFP, so the profile picture NFTs, like the was the board eight YOP club, board apes or something. But the reason one of the things we're seeing is like, well, you can buy that profile pic and then yeah, you can use it as your Twitter profile, your Twitch profile, whatever. And that's sort of like akin to having a gallery in your home. That's the way your digital presence sort of shows the world. I'm cool. I bought this thing. This thing speaks to me. And I want you to know that I connect to this thing and here it is.
And so that avatar has become so much more meaningful than when it was originally conceived. It's now like the wall upon which you hang your preferred art and stuff. It's really, it's wild to kind of see how that shifts. But Kathy, I feel like I cut you off. You were about to say something. Well, I was going to say that part of the thing that I also find interesting, I follow some artists, some NFT artists, because I need to, because it's part of our business. And these guys have actually are showing me interesting generative art, are connecting me with interesting people on Twitter that I would never have followed before. And then one of the things that I love is there's this, just a 3D gallery that you can make from your collection. And then here's another, it's not just the little JPEG, it's this immersive experience. And that, I don't know when that will be, at least 100 years. I don't know when it will be really useful. I mean, we talk a little bit about when will we really be replaced by AI? And I'm just going to put it after I die. That's safe. That's a very safe answer. It's entirely possible. It's also, it's hopeful. It's like, hey, maybe I won't have to worry about it. Alan, real quick, before we get too far from it, and I think I already know the answer, but by chance in your, the Google arts and culture piece that you've done, were any of the art pieces that people responded to, were any of them generative or were they all traditional human created art pieces? Those were all traditional human created art pieces from the last, mostly paintings in the last few millennia. Going all the way back to cave art, actually. Yeah. And they're all human pieces though. This is the thing. It's a generative thing. It is still the human who made the algorithm and it has been curating which of the 50,000 pieces it generated, are they going to put on display? That's a very good point. It's easily thought of and dismissed as a replacement, but it's not talked about enough as being a tool, just as much as like a paintbrush is a tool, this is.
It's just a different, unique tool that we haven't had until now. And that kind of brings up one of the other questions that we were pondering, is what happens if it becomes the de facto tool? If it's the tool that people want to buy the most, if it's the tool that's the most popular. I don't think it's possible that AI-generated art would completely wipe out the existence of artists with paintbrushes, but what does it do to the community or to the culture if that becomes the dominant thing? Is an interesting question that I think Alan raised, but I wonder too. I share Kathy's suspicion that this is not going to happen for a while, because art is probably one of the last things that will be replaced by AI, but you know, it's not inconceivable that AI could take all of the artworks that are available today, not necessarily create something entirely new, but combine them in ways that are interesting enough. And sort of interpolate them in these really high-level complex ways. And it's already starting to do that. You can create a painting in the style of Van Gogh with style transfer, and that's sort of a simple technology version of this. But perhaps you could say, well, what if Van Gogh had actually painted this scene? What would it look like? And it could be a really perfect idea of that. Or it could be, what if you were halfway between Van Gogh and Chagall, some other artists in a different style, different period, and actually come up with some very convincing rendition of that, that is very pleasing to the eye, that people actually, if they didn't know it was AI-generated, would prefer in a blind taste test over other paintings. What happens then? I don't know. I think essentialism takes hold. We still sort of see things as tied to the artists who created them. And so that is a fundamental limitation. But should it? Is that really how we should choose the art that we hang on our walls? Because at the end of the day, you're not going to spend too much time probably explaining it to people. And it's mostly decorative. And so, I don't know. That could go both ways on that. Yeah. Yeah. Alan, we talked a little bit... Yeah. 
My understanding right now, from the little bit of research I've done and read, most AI-generated pieces, and Cathy, you'll certainly know more than I will on this, but most of the AI-generated pieces are driven, there's a big library of data, be it a series of portraits or what have you, that gets loaded in, that gets analyzed, and then the machine is making aesthetic choices to combine and put those things together into new pieces, and then there's, like you said, a human curator who's picking from those 50,000 new pieces and saying, these are the ones that I want to display. But is it conceivable, instead of making aesthetic choices, using the data, Alan, that you have, like picture this, this is a crazy idea, you walk in, blank canvas is hanging on the wall, and there's a camera or something that can sense your emotion, right, and read your emotion, and then generate a piece unique to you in that moment and put it on that canvas. Is that possible? Or did somebody already do that? Will that be possible? What do you think about that? I think that's possible. And I think that's probably one of the more promising areas, not necessarily even in generating it, but you could choose from all the artworks that you've ever enjoyed in your life. And each one, you know, is tied to some specific moment in your life has personal meaning to you, or, you know, might just have a general emotional impact on people that it understands and can characterize. And it can basically surface these at the right times. And I don't see that being that difficult. You could already, you know, kind of, and I think the AI could, maybe it doesn't know how good a piece of art is. But it could say, this is the general tone of it. I think an AI can do that. You could, with enough examples, it could be able to say, this is sort of an elegant piece of art, or, or this is something that's trying to be more psychedelic, or dreamy, or whimsical, or whatever, what have you. And it could be able to sort those artworks into those general categories and be right most of the time. And, and if it knows then something about whether the art's good or bad, it's imposed by our curators, appreciators, people who price art by yourself, you know, you might have art that you like that you have put into your Pinterest or whatever repository that you have or artsy. It could then literally surface the right things at the right times. I think that's totally reasonable, or, you know, could surface things maybe that are.
This podcast is produced by Hume AI, a research lab and technology company. Its goal is to build equity, empathy, and compassion into ubiquitous artificial intelligence systems. What is it based on your emotion? It's like, well, how far does that go? We already have Netflix trying to recommend things based on our preference, maybe not how I feel when I sit down, but based on my preference. And so there's got to be a big machine somewhere trying to figure out everything about me and then push stuff at me to give it money. That's America, isn't it? That is macro targeting, right? But you know, this would ideally be something you have more control over, because it's not an ad, it's content. Got it. Yeah. You make a decision to offer your data and you get something in return. For sure. Have you mentioned something interesting when you were talking about the difference between like not being moved by a JPEG of a monkey, which I take issue with, but I understand. But rather being moved by sort of being awe-stricken by the scale of a larger piece or something like that. Are you guys seeing any cool, interesting things in terms of like, especially with this Girls Who Code thing coming up, with NFTs, with people trying to... Interesting ways that people are bringing them into the physical realm, even though they exist and are primarily digital commodities, but to sort of bridge that gap and attract another... Are you seeing cool stuff and like sort of solutions to that problem of how do we communicate this in a traditional sense? Sure. So I'm in engineering, don't see a lot of it, because I stay in my engineering world. But it's my understanding that some of the art fairs, I think Miami had some NFT displays. I'm even seeing NFT galleries show up in London and maybe even New York, where you can go in and see the NFTs. And the Koenig Gallery here in Berlin had a piece that had people on a line down the street waiting to see the piece. Yeah.
So, yes and no, and then is it then this existentialist thing and it's not really the fact that it's an NFT is not the interesting part piece. And from our point of view, what we're really going after mostly with many of our artists are the artists who are now interested in doing NFT, we want to continue the relationship. The galleries who want to adopt NFTs, we want to make sure that our platform is enabling them. And so we really think it's the gallery, the galleries and artists are going to be the ones who move this forward, such as it gets moved forward. Yeah. And something that didn't even click for me right now until you just said the NFT isn't the interesting thing, but I didn't even realize that when I keep saying all the excitement around NFT, that'd be like me saying like the excitement around this marble sculpture. It's the media, it's not where I'm not even talking about the piece, I'm talking about the medium. I wonder how long until we get past that and we start acknowledging the art more so in the mainstream. Because right now, the mainstream conversation is just like this magical thing, the NFT that nobody knows, but makes people rich somehow. It's like what everyone's talking about, but there's obviously a lot more going on there. Yeah. I mean, there's something gimmicky about buying a reproducible sort of monkey NFT, but if it's really an amazing piece of digital art and you really earnestly want to prove your ownership of it, that's a whole different story, right? That's a whole different story. You mentioned the things that you're not, and first of all, I apologize, because you're right, that scope, that was a question that kind of falls out of your purview as an engineer. But I'm curious, what were some of the most exciting challenges that you have faced that were directly in your, that you got to, like the problem you got to solve? What was like the most exciting one so far that you guys have been working on? If you can pull the curtain back and reveal that, obviously. Gosh. So what I've been working on since I've gotten to Artsy that I really like is, and it's a simple thing. It just makes me happy. So I'll just... Love it. And anybody can have it is we've got a widget on our home screen on iOS. And we have our editorial people pick out what we call the trove, and then it shows up on my home screen. And I know this is not yet AI, but here, I get to have something out of it.
And this is what I struggle with is when all of the algorithms of the universe are amplifying my own taste, then it's an echo chamber and where do I get the novelty? Where do I get something new? Where do I get something that is just a little outside or maybe far outside what I would normally do? And this is what I think as a creative person, if you don't want to become irrelevant or derivative, you have to continuously get new things into your environment. And as an audio engineer, you know that if you don't keep feeding noise and feedback into the loop, the wave dies. So this is just many, many ways you can say this. You can say it with words, music, audio, whatever. You need to have input coming in as well as output. And so I love, I've got it on the today screen, I've got a small screen and then I've got it on the next one. So I see it three different ways and I see new art all the time. And so this is what I am just overjoyed with. I think it's just so simple. Yeah, it's so simple, but again, it's another one of those things where I was so comfortable and used to looking at a problem, if you could say a certain way, that it didn't even dawn on me as I keep saying, oh, the AI can make the canvas look like exactly what I need in that moment based on what it thinks. But it's like, yeah, that's the echo chamber. That's the problem. Everything's doing that right now. So how much more valuable is it to have something that is broadening my horizons, that is exposing me to different voices, different art, different information? That's such a cool, you're right, it's so simple, but it's so important and so valuable to have that. That's a very, very cool thing. Oh, thank you for sharing that. Well, I invite you also to come to Berlin. And also like this is one of the things that I was finding a little bit in the United States cultural scene was it was just a little derivative to me. And this is maybe a little overproduced. I don't know. This is my own taste change over time. And there's more of a conversation, I find, I'm on a more depth of a conversation. But who knows? Maybe AIs will do that for us too. What do you think, Alan? Do you think they could? Yeah. I mean, they're not going to have the conversation for us, but...
I think AI has the opportunity to be optimized for something other than this is the kind of thing you've engaged in before. I think that there are much more interesting optimization functions that have yet to be explored, like emotion, I think, as an optimization function. Is this a trajectory you could be on that would provoke you into something new and potentially a breakthrough of some kind? Is this, you know, knowing that you were interested in this thing that's sort of unusual for your taste. Maybe we can bring you even further along that trajectory. That would be a different optimization function, right? And I think these are all things that people should be exploring a lot more. But unfortunately, I think you're right. I think a lot of the AI is right now optimized for where they can get the most signal. And I think as the AI gets smarter that we can move more away from that. But in the meantime, there's this danger of getting too caught up in just optimizing the same things you've already been engaged in. Yeah. Yeah. Very cool. We're coming in to the home stretch, which is and we always tend to tackle a lot of this stuff in terms of like what's coming and what's here and what the future is going to look like. We've talked about a lot of change, a lot of new ideas. And I love always, if we can, to look in the not too distant future. Where do we see all this tech that the AI is changing art in the art world the most? Is it going to be the artists as a tool? Is it going to be as a curator? What do we think is going to be the most significant impact looking to the not too distant future? Forget about when we're gone, but let's talk about before we get out of here. What do we think is going to be the biggest thing that we'll see in our lifetimes and where it'll fall? I'll wait. You know, I think I've always loved the idea from when I first was hearing about AI, whether it was in science section or what of a little agent. So I could I could program agents and maybe I don't even have to program the agents. Agents would figure out what I needed. And I guess maybe people stopped calling them that after the matrix. But. I like this idea, like you've got your little advisor on your shoulder and maybe it helps you get on the hunt.
And this is kind of like this collecting idea, it's fun, it's addictive. And I think people are in the hunt for data, they're on the hunt for the new, they're on the hunt for something. So here's something that could figure out just, I mean, I hope we can do a good job of this, you know, at some point, to have make sure that technology is a force for good in the world. And to again, help bring you into the cultural conversation, to give you tidbits about a piece of art that you have that you didn't know about, that maybe there's a trend that's upcoming and you get on the forefront of it because you have these agents helping you out. And you hope that you have, eventually you hope you have this little swarm of agents doing the same thing for you with your finances and do I really have to file my taxes? Can my agent do that for me? We've talked about the agents before in the show. I raised the question of if my agent who I've entrusted with my finances goes rogue, and I don't know, digitally robs a bank or something, am I responsible for my agent? And we had a nice long conversation about that. That's one of those problems I don't think I'll have to solve in my lifetime. But yes, the digital agents is a very exciting idea for sure, for sure. I personally take comfort though, knowing Cathy, that people like yourself who are asking these questions, who this is a priority for are actively out there engineering solutions in the stuff that we use. So thank you, not just for hanging out with us today, because I'm going to go to Alan for his answer on what he thinks about the future in a second, but also just for asking those questions and making that a priority that yes, we want to advance further, but let's make sure we're doing it the right way and we're thinking about the right stuff. I appreciate you very much for that. Thank you very much. Of course, of course. Alan, what about you, sir? Where do you hope or predict the biggest impact we'll see in this world with the AI and stuff that we've been talking about, specifically in the art world? Yeah, I mean, I love what RxE is doing and the idea of democratizing what an agent of art curation or appreciation or
Brokering art sales does, democratizing it using AI by making them more powerful with the human in the loop and giving more people access without replacing them. I think that is a great theme for us. I also would build on what I said last time with Richard Karras, and that was a slightly different episode since it was on digital creation and CGI and so forth. But the idea that some of these tools could be used to unlock abilities of artists or the ability to take their imagination and make it into an art piece as a tool, I think is really, really promising. Much more so than I think AI actually taking the place of an artist. So, the idea that you can sketch something in a person or an environment and it can create that, take that sketch and make it into a 3D model while preserving each aspect of, at every level of analysis, the form and style of the art that enables it to convey emotions and to convey incredible aesthetic experiences. But taking that, making it three-dimensional, making it interactive, making it a character that speaks to you, like all these things that really unlock new abilities for artists. I think that's going to be really extremely promising. Yeah. Amplifying as opposed to replacing. Amplifying. Yeah. Very cool. Well, as per usual, no matter how much time I get with our guests and you, Alan, it's just, it's simply not enough. Kathy, what a treat to have you on with us today. And I mean that sincerely. Thank you so, so much. We appreciate you making the time to hang out with us. I'm going to find an excuse to bring you back on. Really, I am. I want to remind everyone to head over to artsy.net if you haven't yet. They are currently hosting a fundraising event to benefit and support the Ukrainian people. And of course, keep an eye out for the upcoming event in support of Girls Who Code. What better way to start your own collection if you haven't already? Do some for yourself and for some others out there. It's the perfect merge. Alan, do me a favor, man. Keep us posted on that paper that currently is under review. And when you are ready to go with that, we'll do one of those bonus episodes. I'll ask a million questions about it. But other than that, thank you, buddy, so much. Sincerely, I can't host the show without you and I love doing it with you. So thank you for being here. And hey, to those out there listening,
The Feelings Lab at hume.ai, T-H-E-F-E-E-L-I-N-G-S-L-A-B at H-U-M-E dot AI. Whatever you want, questions, comments, long meandering paragraphs about your day, doesn't matter. It's email. It's free. Send us something. Send us something good, and maybe I'll read it on the air. All right. There you go. You did it. You made it all the way through my ridiculous outro, and another outstanding episode of the Feelings Lab. Farewell for now, my friends. From the Feelings Lab, I'm Matt Forte. Thanks again, everybody, and please stay safe out there.
