Hello world, what is up? Welcome back to the Feelings Lab. I'm your host Matt Forte, and on today's episode, we're asking the question, are expressions innate? Now, this is one of those broader, wide net topics we like to throw out there once in a while that open the door to talk about all kinds of fun stuff. But think about it. Seriously, the way you laugh when something is funny, the way you sigh when you're a little tired or exhausted, or the way you cry when Simba keeps pushing his dumb little paws against Mufasa going, wake up, dad. Come on, wake up. And he's just poking them. And if you don't cry at that scene, I'm afraid there is nothing this or any other podcast can do to help you. Anyway, the point is, nobody taught you how to do those things or behave that way or feel like that. You just kind of do, right? Now, granted, anybody who's had the opportunity to watch a child grow and develop knows they're always watching, right? Absorbing things. So to assume that maybe these expressions are learned is not a crazy out there idea, but how then do we account for the universal nature of some of our expressions? Vision impaired athletes have been shown to physically display pride upon victory almost the exact same way as other athletes with sight. And they've never had the opportunity to visually observe and learn those things. Studies of remote tribes isolated from the outside world have revealed they produce similar sounds for disgust, sadness and other emotions, just like we do, despite the dramatic differences in our societies and cultures. Innate or not, let's put that aside for a moment. Why do we produce emotional expressions in the first place? You know, previous conversations on this show would lead me to believe there's a social imperative, a means of communicating to our tribe, a warning if we're angry or a call for support if we're in trouble, you know. But then why do I still laugh when I'm the only one in the room watching TV all by myself? Well, why did I scream in terror when I was cleaning out the garage the other day and this massive like cricket spider thing with antennas that jumped at me, came out of nowhere, landed right on me. I had a box of nails and I dropped that. Those went everywhere.
I expressed my frustration via the utterance of an expletive, which admittedly that I did learn from my father or my grandfather. And don't judge me, because objectively, this was a terrifying experience. And to my larger point, I'm fairly certain any one of you would have done almost the exact same thing. Anyway, rather, I'm completely alone, or with a group of friends or people I emote, I have expressions, we all do. At the end of the day, well, yes, there are plenty of behaviors I've learned, emotions I try to understand, harness or control. There are also expressions that simply are things that have always been for me, things to me that feel like they could be innate. Now, you know the drill. I got a bunch of hows and whys, and I'm really excited to jump in and try to get some answers. I'm even more excited for some of the tangents and diversions we go on along the way, because we've got an amazing guest joining us today. But first, speaking of amazing people joining me, I'm going to ask my co-host, Alan, if he knows any. That was mean. I'm just kidding, Alan. You are obviously an amazing person. And you're also here joining me as always, the CEO with the most, that was clumsy, Dr. Alan Cowan. Alan, how are you doing, sir? You like that one? Yeah, I think we should do that every week. You got it, man. It's your show. I'll do whatever you want. Alan, thank you so much for being here. I'm excited for this one. Are you excited as well? Very excited. That's as much of an emotional expression as I can muster right now. Off to a strong start, sir. All right. Let's bring in our guest joining us now, Associate Professor in the Department of Social Psychology at the University of Amsterdam in the Netherlands. Actually, that study I mentioned in the earlier bit of the intro about remote tribes having similar sounding expressions, it's one of theirs. How cool is that? Their work examines emotion with a particular focus on the communication of emotions via nonverbal expressions. They're interested in how factors such as preparedness, culture, and what we've learned all shape our emotions and the ways that they are communicated. I couldn't invent a better person to bring on for me to potentially annoy with my endless stream of questions. Please welcome to the show, the great Dr. Disa Souter is here. Disa, how are you? I'm very well, thank you. How are you? I'm all right. I'm not too
Alan, how are you? I know it's early for you. I'm waking up. I'm almost there. For the record, people at home. They don't need to know what time it is, Matt. That's the first time you've ever asked me to not do something. I'm going to honor that, Alan. It's 1120. PM. It's sad, people. It's evening and he's not kidding. We're doing all right. And you're coming to us. Keep me honest here. You're all the way over in Amsterdam right now. Is that right? That is right. Yeah. Ah, so cool to have you with us. I really appreciate it. I really do. All right. Well, hey, let's have some fun. Let's jump right on in. Before we go anywhere, get deep into anything, Alan, we've talked a ton on this show about vocal bursts and nonverbal expressions. Are those the same? When I talk about expressions and nonverbal vocal expressions, are those the same thing as a vocal burst or is there an important distinction I should be aware of, our listeners should be aware of, or they just help me understand a little bit better there? So, yeah, a vocal burst, I would say, are the nonverbal utterances that don't have any kind of speech content at all. And then there's nonverbal aspects of speech too, which we call speech prosody. And those two together, I think, are the nonverbal aspects of emotional expression in the voice. And that's how we kind of get to expression. And Disa, is he right? I think he's right. Yeah. But interestingly, there are also these in-between kind of, you know, exclamations like, ouch, which aren't exactly the same as other kind of speech, but also are not entirely nonverbal, like laughing or crying. So there's a little bit of a continuum there. But indeed, you have everything from speech prosody to the really raw kind of screams, for example. Amazing. The raw screams is going to be our band name, should we ever form one for the record. So let's just mark that down. Well, thank you for the clarification, both of you. In preparing for this episode, one of the things I got really excited to talk about, and at the time I'd used the word involuntary when we were doing our writing. I don't know if that was the necessary, necessarily the right term to use, but the expressions that we don't control.
in a way, gasping, laughing, sighing, blushing, crying, those sorts of things that I got really excited to kind of talk about. And I suppose one of the first big questions, unless you think there's a better one, Alan, is just why? Why do we produce emotional expressions? Why do we behave in this way to begin with? And at least I'd love to get your perspective on that. Why do we produce emotional expressions? What do you think? I would say there isn't one reason. There are lots of reasons. And so some of them are to do with communication and others are just for individual benefits. So for communication purposes, we might want to signal to other people how we're feeling, how we're likely to behave, what we want from them, what we don't want from them. And so often emotional expressions have communicative functions. So we're trying to tell somebody something in a kind of indirect way. But sometimes emotional expressions can be just produced for the individual's benefit. So they're not necessarily intrinsically communicative. So when we sigh, it actually has a restorative function for ourselves. So it helps kind of reset the physiological balance. And so often if you've been in a stressful situation, you will produce a sigh when that stress is over. Now we perceive that sigh as expressing relief, for example, but for the individual, it's not necessarily the case that they are sighing in order to communicate to somebody else that they're relieved. Right. It's probably just serving the function for that individual to restore the kind of physiological balance in their own body. And then as a byproduct, others can infer that the person might be feeling a certain way. Forgive me if I'm getting too lost in the weeds fairly early on here. But I think of the image of or like the idea of like a pressure release valve, like you let off like, right, you exhale in a way.
Is it the physical act of the air releasing from the lungs, the sighing? Because at that point, I'm like, well, if it's just the physical act of doing that, why not just exhale? Why do I literally go like, why? It's different than just letting air out. There's something more to a sigh. How much do we know about that, the uniqueness of it and why it is the way it is? So we know that we're not the only species that sigh with relief. Actually, rats also sigh when they're relieved. It's a really cool study by some Polish researchers who fitted these rats with really tiny breath belts, which I imagine to somebody kind of like having to deal with a breath belt. But anyway, love it. Yeah. And then they conditioned these rats to basically when a light came on, let's say it was like a red light. Every time it came on, there would be this unpleasant and small shock. And so they came to basically expect that every time they saw this red light, there would be a shock soon. Then there was a second light. And when that light went on after the first red light, that meant there's no shock. So they learned that the second light, if that was turned on, that meant there isn't a shock coming. And they found that the rats would sigh, they produce like a tiny little sigh of relief when the second light came on. So that was basically like expressing relief. Now, I would expect they're probably not doing this kind of theatrical like, oh, humans might do in certain social situations. But I think this is really kind of the kind of foundation of the size of relief that we produce. So that's probably where it comes from. But then on top of that, it might also be that we learn to produce more explicit kind of vocalizations that also serve a communicative function on top of this kind of just
automatic behavior that is much more basic. That's so both fascinating and adorable. The idea of just like a little, a little sigh of relief. So amazing. How many, this is a pretty big question, but like how many types of expressions have we been able to identify and catalog? Because I, for whatever reason, I would equally believe if you were like a couple of dozen or a couple of thousand, either of those numbers sound possible to me. So how many are we aware of right now in terms of that? We've identified in terms of non vocal, nonverbal vocalization types. Yeah. If you're casting a wide net and observing someone, what are all the expressions you're keeping an eye out for the whole, like how many, is there a number like, Oh, we're looking for over 10,000. We're looking for 40, you know, that's a great question. And I wish I had the answer. There isn't like an established or accepted typology of this class of behavior. So I can't tell you, but I would be pretty confident in saying, I think we're looking more like a few dozen in the hundreds or certainly not the thousands, but what we don't really have a clear answer to yet is how many different clusters there are and to what extent are they really discreet or slightly overlapping because there aren't large scale enough studies of naturally occurring behaviors. And when you ask people to produce a vocalization, it tends to be much more kind of prototypical than the kind of behaviors that people actually produce in their everyday lives when, you know, it's just noisier with real world behavior. For sure. You know, it's funny when you started talking about this, like knowing clusters or trying to figure that out, I immediately envisioned the emotion maps that we've talked about a million times that Alan and the team over at Humor are quite known for. You know, those maps, they go well beyond the basic six, right? In terms of expressions, are we sitting in a similar, like on the verge of like a.
If you have a similar breakthrough, you think of, will they have their own map at some part. You are building a map. Do they sit somewhere on your map, Allan? Help me understand the distinction here. Yeah, we got maps. We got maps of vocalizations. You know what's cool is that they're not clustered in the way that words are. With words, like you have, you might have a couple dozen discrete words, if the vocabulary of the language was a couple dozen words, and you wouldn't be able to take those phonetic properties of the words and combine them to form entirely new words, right? But with vocal bursts, you can. You can actually blend them together and form all kinds of nuanced blended meanings. So actually, even though it's a few dozen dimensions, you could imagine thousands of different vocalizations that have reliably distinct meanings. And that's what we basically map out. So, and they don't form these clusters, they form these blends along many, many different dimensions. It's kind of like Bob Ross's palette, right? He's got like four colors on there, but that dude's throwing up a whole landscape. He's got it all. He's got every shade and every color of the wind, as it were. Yeah, it's not unlike color, right? Yeah, for sure. Which is why I imagine the maps are so beautiful and colorful. That's not just a pretty cool design. It's also kind of functional in a way to communicate that like, look at the way all these things kind of work together. That's right. I mean, it's a big visualization issue to get people to understand, well, if vocalizations are so complex, how can you explain to me what they mean? And then presenting that information is very difficult. So, having colors is really helpful because you can blend them together to form new colors and actually see visually what's going to happen when you go through that gradient and then hear the gradient of sounds that we actually produce. You talk about how important having the visual element is. That's a great tease. I want to talk a little bit more about what to do when you don't have that element. We'll get to that in a little bit. But as we're going through and just discussing all the different types, we say there's probably a couple of dozen. I imagine, Disa, they're like children in that no matter what anyone says, you have a favorite. Are there some or one in particular you've done a bulkier research on like laughing or something like that? Yeah, it's got to be laughter. Yeah, I was hoping so. What made you choose laughter? How did that begin?
There is some really neat research on laughter in non-human primates that is almost as adorable as the rat study that I talked about. They actually had baby chimps, baby gorillas, baby orangutans, and baby humans, and then they tickled those, and then they recorded their vocalizations. They found that there was actually a great deal of similarity in the laughs or the vocalizations of these different species, which suggests that laughter is an incredibly ancient evolutionary scene adaptation. It's also actually the vocalization type that we see most cross-cultural consistency in. I think because it is so basic and so undeniable in its basicness, it's really interesting for that reason. Actually, what we have found is that human babies laugh more like chimpanzees than like human adults, which some parents won't like hearing. Actually, I was reading something, I think it was from 2018, that was about your study on this, and I didn't realize that there were people tickling chimpanzees as part of it. I thought I picked the wrong job because if I could just tickle chimpanzees as my actual paid profession, that just seems like a dream. I don't know if this was before we started or in the intro, but we talked about Alan having a real job, and if that's a real job, I mean, that's the real job, is tickling of the chimpanzees. That's weird. It's funny.
One of the things I was going to ask, and now I can see, based on the extra information I have, that was part of it. I didn't know, reading the article that I was reading about the study, I didn't know if you guys set out to find that correlation, or if like, in studying the baby's laughter, you guys realized, somebody was like, hey, do you, that sounds like chimpanzees. Like, I didn't know how it came about. It is. Yeah, I was having a beer, like many important scientific conversations happen in the pub, right. And, and then my friend who is also a co author on this paper, Mariska Kretz, said, Hey, a friend of mine, played me like a video of her baby laughing. And I thought that sounds a whole lot like a chimp. And so I told her that, and she was a little like, baby sounds like a chimp. And then I was like, well, show me the video. And she did. And I was like, hey, you're right. Because one of the things that's different about human adults laughing as compared to all other primates that have been studied, is that humans tend to laugh on the exhalation. So ha ha ha, right. Whereas chimps and other primates tend to laugh both on the inhalation and exhalation. And so what this baby was doing was laughing on both the inhalation and exhalation. And we were like, let's check whether this is like just this baby being weird, or whether this is a thing that babies do. And if so, what's the kind of trajectory? Does it change at a particular time point? Or just change gradually over time? Yeah. So yeah, that was the kind of genesis of that study was just like somebody having a baby that sounded like a chimp. That must have been the most pleasant study of just like baby laughter and tickling chimps all day. That's not a bad space to be in. Um, yeah, and it was it was really interesting. So yeah, the the piece it said that you guys found it was, um, it's kind of gradual. It wasn't like a switch flipped. It was one day.
I just started laughing like adults, which would be horrifying, by the way, if one day your infant was just like, thankfully, it takes time. There was something towards the end that you said, it was like one of the second or last paragraphs that I wrote down. And it was because I always love this kind of this thought of this looking ahead. And you wrote beyond that, I'd be interested in seeing whether our findings applied to other vocalizations and laughter. And I'm just I just wanted to get a follow up. You know, it's 2018. So it hasn't been that long. It's only been a couple of years. But I'm curious, you know, have you guys has has the as the Venn diagram grown anymore? Or right now is the most we know it's the laughter. Yeah, we haven't done it yet. But yeah, it's still on my rather long to do list. Yeah. We all know that story. Everybody thought the pandemic was going to help them get through their to do list. I just have the time to myself and I was like, Nope, wasn't that wasn't the time. Okay. Fair enough. Very fair. Very, very fair. Alan, you know how much I love whenever we bring in the the animal or in this case, the chimpanzee correlations. Have you were you aware of the the tickling study, the baby study and all this stuff? Were you holding out on me? I wasn't aware of that particular study, but I'm aware that chimps laugh and there's also been similar studies that go back even further, even as like the 1980s of mouse laughter. I'm actually kind of curious. So mice also get tickled by experimenters. There are experimenters whose job is to tickle mice. And they form these laughs that you can't hear unless you lower the frequencies because they're actually ultrasonic frequencies of laughter. But then they sound kind of like human laughs. So I'm curious if, Disa, if you looked into this, do the mice laugh when they're inhaling and exhaling or just when they're exhaling? That's a great question. I don't know. But I think I could email Brian Litsa and ask because this would be like an opportunity to combine the breath belts and the tickling so you can bring together all of them. We're bringing it all together. We have a lot of laughs here on the Feelings Lab, but we're doing important work.
I like to believe. Yeah. But also, what's cool about those studies as well is that they don't just measure the mice when they're being tickled, but also when they're playing non-contact play, they form the same vocalizations. And so, it's not just a primitive tickle response. It also is a play response, even going back to mice. Mice are kind of like... If primates are our first evolutionary cousins, apes are our evolutionary siblings, mice are like our second cousins, rodents are more closely related to us than dogs or horses and stuff. Yeah. And yeah. So, any... You and any rat on the streets of New York literally share an ancestor, right? Like a few million generations back. And your nearest ancestor that you share with a dog is like twice that far, right? So... But I do share an ancestor with a dog is what you're saying. You share an ancestor with every animal on earth. The animal kingdom. Yeah. What a beautiful thought. And by that measure, we're related, Alan. We're all one big happy family. I mean, we're much more closely related. But anyway, let's go. I don't know. We can do a genetic test for that, but... Yeah. I'll see you at Thanksgiving, buddy. But what struck me about the laugh respiratory belt on the mice, I think that's really cool. There's other vocalizations that mice form. So, there's really cool vocalizations mice form when you trap them in a small chamber and then you introduce another mouse who can unlock the chamber. You can actually hear the mouse who's trapped form distress vocalizations and they sound like squeaks. They're squeaky distress vocal, like you can tell. And when you make the chamber so that it is actually soundproof, so there's a stress vocalization that the vocalizations can't get out, the other mouse doesn't help. They don't even know that this mouse is in trouble. When you play distress vocalizations through a speaker that's outside of the chamber, then the mouse helps. And so, these are definitely distress... They're social signals, in other words. They're not just these involuntary things. And so, I wonder if...
It's the similar thing with the relief vocalization too. And so, these are questions that I don't think are fully answered, but it is true that they're not just involuntary sounds. They're not just functional sounds. Oh, we lost Matt for a second. Oh, did I pop? I popped out, but I popped back? Is that what happened? You popped back. You're back. Keep going. Keep going. Don't worry about me. Just keep going. Finish your thought and then we'll figure this out. The evolutionary roots of the social signaling function of expressions go back pretty far. That was you. That was you. You stuck the landing. Did you get it? I think where I was going. I'm not sure if that was where I was, where I started, but... Well, thank you for that, Alan. And I hate to, I always do this, where you'll say something very intelligent and very insightful, and then I latch on to one silly little bit, and that's what I bring back up. So I apologize, audience. You mentioned pitching down the laughter, and I believe we've talked about this on the show before, and it sounds almost like you. I'm reminded of, I don't know if anyone else has ever done this, the Chipmunks, Alan and the Chipmunks Christmas songs. If you have the record and you play it at a slower speed, it's actually just three monotone guys, adult men, just, Christmas, Christmas time. And that's what I think of with the mouse thing. Is that what they did, essentially? They just pitched it down in no way. Yeah. I mean, we can't hear beyond like 20,000 hertz. There's ultrasonic frequencies we just can't hear that mice, they can hear up to way beyond that. And that's true of many species. So, yeah, literally just pitching it down, you can hear a lot more of what the social signaling that's happening is going on. Yeah. That's so cool. And again, I think we've covered this before, so I apologize for the repeat, but I'm equally fascinated now as I might have been the first time I heard it. All right. Let's keep... I want to keep going on laughter for a second, though, because one of the things I was really interested, we've talked about just how there's so many different emotions. There's a spectrum. There's so many different expressions. There's a spectrum and they can all mix and blend together. And now here we are, we're going even further and we're talking about laughter. There's... Well, you laugh on the inhale, you laugh on the exhale.
There's there's giggling, there's all these different types of ways people laugh. I've known a couple of people with awful laughs, just just the terror and I don't, we don't speak anymore. And that's by design. What informs the way that someone laughs? Do we know anything about that? Is there a significance to the rhythm and pitch? Have we been able to get ultra granular and identify a spectrum of laughter yet? There have been some attempts. I mean, physiology is going to be a major determinant, just like your, you know, the size of your vocal tracts and your lung volume and stuff like that is going to shape your laugh. Like if you think about how a kid laughs, it's not just that they're laughing on inhale and exhale. It's also their pitch is higher. So it sounds different. You can tell that it's laughing. There's some evidence that culture shapes laughter, but the effects are pretty small. So people can basically just above chance level, tell if a laugh is from somebody from their own group or another group, but they can't really say much more than that. So you can't say, no, is this guy from Jamaica or Florida or Namibia or Amsterdam, but you can say, is it somebody from my group or not? But that's about as sophisticated as we can get with those kinds of judgments. So that suggests that culture does play a bit of a role in shaping our laughter, but not a very major one. And that's probably because of this very strong kind of bottom up involuntary, you know, rap aspect of the laughs. Do we know if we can identify their of my group? Is it a familiarity with that individual's laugh? Oh, that's Steve. Steve's of my group. Or is it literally that's a person who's from my circle? That's how we all laugh. Yeah. So you don't need to know the person. It can be just like a total stranger, but it's an American stranger. You can tell right from it's just from somewhere else. But for sure, with people, you know, you are more.
Much more sensitive to, yeah, you know, you can really detect some very fine distinctions of like, oh, I don't think you really thought it was funny, but he really wants to communicate to the other person that he thought so, you know, with your partner or like siblings, you can really tell at a level of sophistication that you have no chance with. The more, the more familiar you are with the person, the more you can sort of read their book, as it were, and understand like, okay, that's a polite laugh. Yeah, I didn't think that was funny, but thank you. I appreciate that kind of thing. But also what's interesting with you talking about an individual is that actually from laughter and other nonverbal vocalizations, it's really difficult to identify people as compared to a speech segment. So if it is a person, you know, really well, of course, you know, you can pick out that person's laugh easily. But with like people you don't really know, if I gave you like an identity learning task with 20 new people, the time you would take to pick them apart just based on their laughs would be so much longer than if you had them saying any random piece of speech, that is much more diagnostic for identity than vocalizations like laughter, which is probably because a lot of how we laugh is more similar to each other than how we talk. Wow, so fascinating. Well, I purposely I chose the term spectrum of laughter. And I, you know, and I phrased it that way, because I'm always excited when we explore this sort of this nuance, you know, you think we have a total understanding of something, and then you pick it up. And it's like, there's a whole universe under here. And one of the areas I know the particular interest for you is positive emotions, and more specifically, the kind of breadth and depth of positive emotions. And the funny thing is, I tried to think of a few myself, and I realized I was just listing synonyms for happy, I was like, Oh, content, pleasant, satisfied. I was like, I don't know what the hell I'm doing. So I figured I'd defer to the experts here. What are some of the different kinds of positive effective states that you focus on identified and sort of grouped?
So we talked already about relief and amusement, right? In terms of other states that are really distinct from each other, I would also pick out gratitude, for example. Then you could think about more difficult positive emotions or less intuitive for people from a given cultural background. So I had a Chinese postdoc who insisted that feeling respected was a discrete positive emotion state. And we kept going back and forth and back and forth. Because to me, this was not really a positive emotion. Being respected based on your position isn't in my cultural framework, something that I would want, right? You want to be respected because of some fundamental interpersonal respect between all people or because of your accomplishments, but not because of your role. But she convinced me that it is so essential and so positive in her culture that she comes from that we had to include it in our list of positive emotions. But then there are other positive emotions like excitement, elevation. Interest is another good one. Yeah, I could go on. I love that. Alan, did you guys ever run into something like that as well? We've talked about in creating the emotion maps and all that stuff, accounting for cultural differences and you know, the way things happen on the other side of the world versus here and so on and so forth. Were there debates of like, well, that doesn't make sense to include that here. We have to put that over on this side. Instead, it had to have been stuff like that when you guys were putting things together. Yeah. So, it happens first when you're translating the terms. It's like, oh, how exactly do you translate this? And typically, there will be some single word that's like, this is the most direct translation, but it doesn't have quite the same meaning. So, sometimes you want to add another word, make it like a phrase. And that usually 2 or 3 words, you can find an experience description that is similar enough. So we... For example, we gather...
There are 21 different dimensions that combine different words that were preserved really, really well across the cultures. And so, notably, some of the dimensions didn't have like a one term that you could take and directly translate. I think it was like awe was one of them. So yeah, in terms of other positive emotions, we have in there pride, awe, admiration, sexual desire, love. So like lots of different... There's a lot more we can add to that list. It's probably like 15 or so. I love that you thought of sexual desire first and then went, yeah, I guess love too. Yeah. You know, people say they're distinct and they are. They are. I just, I really appreciate the order in which your brain recalled them. I just... Well, I guess the bigger question is like within love, there could be bromance that you feel toward a romantic partner and then there's also adoration, which and then there's familial love and there's lots of different types of love and you can break down laughter into different kinds of laugh, different kinds of amusement too. So laughter occurs for other things like adoration, but you can have sort of a more gleeful or joyful amusement. You can have sort of a more contemptuous amusement or a triumphant amusement and we... People at least in the US use these things reliably. There's reliable laughs that are associated with these things like squeal, like a kind of a squealing laugh is more of an adoration thing. Anyway, I could go on for a long time. So, there's a lot of different breakdowns within the positive emotions, but in terms of cultural differences, we see at least 21 dimensions that are shared across pretty much every culture we've looked at and experienced and then a lot of those are shared in expression as well. That's just in response to videos and probably more... That's like a lower limit, I would say. So like 21...
Give or take the universal and then within there, we've said that laughter is like the one that's the most sort of universal that we found. Is that am I accurate in my assessment there? Amusement is always like, yeah, one of the laughter associations with amusement are probably the most reliable of any vocalization, positive or negative. I would totally agree with that. Yeah. Yeah. Amazing. Uh, we, we talk about all these different spectrums, laugh spectrum of positive, effective states. And we're touching on, uh, uh, particularly here, just how culture impacts it and can change it and morph it. You know, did we, and I know this might be impossible to answer cause I'm really, it's with, we have to look, it's historical data. It's what we've recorded and what we've observed over the years, but you know, uh, did we start with like two and then culture and community promoted the creation of more over time? Uh, or, you know, cause I know like we started just with the six basic emotions and now here we are, you know, not too many years later. So like, if we look back and far back, is it just some, have we always been this way, I guess, or has the, just the evolution of our species and the growth of our population, has it yielded new, unique things that we're discovering now? Um, so we started with six emotions, emotions, science started, right. Right. The question between what are the systems that we as humans have and how did they evolve over time versus at what, uh, pace are we discovered, like what's the order in which we are discovering or, you know, mapping them out. Yeah. Yeah. And you know, it's hard to say how many, so there's, there's different ways we can look at it, right. We can look at our evolutionary cousins, you can look at like primates and mice and what's preserved there. And that's a little bit difficult, right. Because you don't know what vocalization means for a primate and that's yeah. Sometimes you do, but then when you move away, at least from, um, from vocalization and you move to facial expression and bodily expression, there are ways that I think the earliest comparisons, uh, that we can make are between, um, representations of expressions.
In ancient old world art versus new worlds, or what is... I should have misnomer a little bit because it's not new for the people in the world. Like in ancient American sculptures, before there was any contact between Europe and America, we see a lot of parallels in how different contexts are associated with different expressions. And so there's these really... There's a rich sculptural tradition, by the way, like 4,000 years ago, most people in the world lived in ancient American civilizations, Mocha civilizations, Aztec civilization later and Inca. Anyway, so there's this whole rich tradition of sculpture that stretches across many of those civilizations. And they're depicting things like torture and people playing music through instruments, which look similar to European instruments in some way, there's drums and stuff. There's people holding weapons who are dressed in armor. There's people lifting heavy things. There's like mothers holding babies in these sculptures, and they're forming facial expressions a lot of the time. And so we actually did a study where we looked at those facial expressions and just tried to see are they similar to what we would expect if the associations between context and expression were similar to what we have now. And there were at least a few that we could pick up. So, torture and pain expressions, very reliable. So, the pain expression clearly is not a recent thing. Weapons and anger, that was something that came out. Pretty reliable association. Mothers holding babies and expressing joy, smiling. That's something that was very reliable in these sculptures. Yeah. Plus, you see in ancient, for example, Egyptian paintings and in descriptions of Aztec culture from like the first ethnographers, who wrote like the Florentine Codex, which was the first ethnography of Aztec culture by conquerors, unfortunately. But in these depictions, there's people crying in funerals in ancient Egypt. And it looks so similar in the depictions of the Aztec rituals of crying.
I want to get into crying a little bit. We've done a lot about laughter. I want to talk a little bit about that, but there is, thank you for that. I ask a question like that because I don't know if this is unique to me or not, but I do find some, some sort of a weird comfort in, in knowing that this is, we're still learning about how we work. We constantly are and we're, we're growing our knowledge, but ultimately this is what it is to be human. You know, there's, we're going to learn more about what it means and how it works, but we've been doing this for a while. And there's, there's a, there's a piece in that, that I, I find that I enjoy whenever I'm feeling the most extreme of an, of an emotion, rather it's, you know, shock or grief or sad or whatever. I always think, well, I'm certainly not the first to experience this. And there, there is a, I will find a way through it. People have been doing it for billions of years. So, that's really cool. And I really, I really always... Not billions though. Well, I mean, billions of people for millions of years is what I meant. Sorry. We've been around for millions, right? We have been around for millions. Yeah. I've met millions of people for millions of years. Hominids have, but actually human... Well, Alan, you should know me well enough. I'm talking about hominids at this point. You know that about me. Of course I know. Of course. Yes. How insulting. Sorry. I promised I wouldn't embarrass you on this episode, Matt. And I've already violated that. That's not bad. So who am I impressing? This is fine. I'm sure Disa has not lost that much respect for me, right? We can still talk. Oh, okay. No. She's disconnected. If you're just listening, she's gone. I've fortunately... All right. Hey, let's get into crying as I weep with embarrassment here. Well, I've always thought of Laughter as like the sequel to crying in that like 100% of the babies I've seen born mostly on TV. Well, no, only on TV. Who am I kidding? I've only seen babies born on TV and in movies, but every time they've been crying. And as I thought through this, I don't know...
I don't know of any example where one of them was born laughing. And frankly, I can't imagine a more unsettling idea. So, but to go back to the big question, at the top of the episode, are expressions innate? I think on crying, there's very little room for debate here, right? We come out doing it immediately. For a majority of us, it is literally the absolute first thing we do upon arrival. But you know, so I guess that kind of answers the question. Expressions are innate, right? Why is crying the first thing we do? Do we know that? That's a great question. An important distinction I was ignorant of. Do we refer to it as crying? So we don't say my baby's screaming? Is that like a cultural thing that we just use softer language? Because if it's not a proper cry, then yeah, it's a good I guess that's different. At what point do the teary things start? Oh, yeah, I don't know. I don't know. Laughter where like it had changes gradually over time, do we think? No, I don't think that there are necessarily different ways to cry if we're referring to the tear. Not at least there. There haven't been any types established in the literature as far as I know. But there are very strong so-called display rules around crying that kick in already in childhood. And those are gendered, right? So they're much stronger display rules. So these are norms about what kind of expressions we can show to whom and in what situations. So we it's kind of like that.
to be more expressive to people close to us, and also in private as compared to in public. And interestingly, generally, the display rules are much looser for positive emotions. So it's fine to show that you're happy, but it's less socially acceptable to show that you're angry or sad. But we found that being moved is associated with strong display rules compared to a whole bunch of other positive emotions. So being moved often involves tears. You're kind of looking in a way pretty vulnerable when you're moved by something. And so apparently, that's not a feeling that's really appropriate in all contexts to really show, unlike many other types of positive emotions, which are basically fine, with the exception also of pride, which, depending on the circumstances, could be kind of perceived as boastful to express, especially in some cultures. We talk about the social circumstances wherein it's appropriate to express at these levels. Do we know anything about the mechanics behind what makes an expression either easier or more challenging to control? In certain circumstances, laughter is impossible to condemn, or the expression fighting back tears comes to mind. What do we know about that? There is some research suggesting that the voice is generally harder to control than the face. So we're reasonably developed in masking, so not necessarily suppressing the expression that we might be producing automatically, but we can kind of then put a smile on top of it, as it were. But with the voice, we've all heard people who are very nervous have this kind of quivering in their speech. And so the best thing you can do if you are worried that your voice will betray you is basically to be quiet, because it's very challenging to actually mask that, especially anxiety in the voice. So modality is one thing.
That determines how easy or hard it is to modulate our emotional expressions. So interesting. And some people are just better at doing that. Is that, you know, does that mean they're, we, I think society has labeled them sometimes like, Oh, he's strong. He, he can really, he's, he's keeping it together. And I look at, I'm like, he's broken. That dude is not engaged with his emotions. Like, dude, you gotta let that stuff out. But it's just, I suppose that's more of like a cultural thing of how we perceive that behavior. That's sort of a mechanical thing. I've been trying to keep track of time and be cognizant of everybody's schedule. I have a trillion things that I wanted to get to today, but one of the things that I was really fascinated about, and I teased a little bit earlier in the episode was we mentioned the importance of having all those colors and the visual component. And so, you know, in writing for this episode, I had brought up to Alan, I said, what happens when a person, you know, vision impaired or hearing impaired, lacks the senses necessary to, to observe or learn a behavior by the traditional means. And Disa, I believe you actually, keep me honest here. You've done a study on the emotional vocalization of deaf people, if that's right. And I just love to know what you found or any stories from that experience. Cause I'm so curious about how, how they navigate the world and all these things that we talk about and the things that I take for granted, vision insight. Yeah. I came to this idea when I was a PhD, PhD student. And then I was talking to this woman who was a sign language researcher. And I, I was telling her about my research project on emotional vocalizations. And I said, you know, because everybody laughs the same, even deaf people laugh the same. And she looked at me and was like, are you sure about that? And I was like, maybe I should not have said that. That's okay. So then a few years later, I started working at the Max Planck Institute in Nijmegen. And I had a very delightful boss there, Steve Levinson, who said, okay, what do you want to do? What are you interested in? What, what do you want to test? And I was like, well, I have this idea with deaf people, because I'm curious what kind of vocalizations do.
they make. And are they kind of similar to the vocalizations of hearing people? Because that seems to me like a way to get at this innateness question, because they, it's a kind of natural deprivation situation, right? They don't have access to the auditory learning that the rest of us do. And he's like, great, do it. And so I did it. And then it turns out that people who are born profoundly deaf on both ears are hard to find, and generally not very keen to vocalize while being recorded, understandably, because many have been told their whole life that their speech sounds weird. And, you know, there's a whole backstory there. But we did manage to find a bunch of people with a collaborator, and a deaf assistant who basically found a bunch of congenitally bilaterally deaf people who vocalize a bunch of different emotional states. And then we play those two hearing listeners. And we just asked them, what emotion do you think this person is expressing? And what we found was that for most of the emotions that we studied, they were recognizable to hearing listeners from the deaf vocalizations. So, you know, it's but they were not as recognizable as hearing people's vocalizations. So I think this is kind of where it becomes a very nuanced conclusion. It's not are they innate or learned. Innateness, by the way, is like a whole mess of a construct, even worse than emotion. Arguably, there's actually a paper that discusses 26 different definitions of innateness. So basically, there is, I believe, evidence for innateness in these vocalizations, because we even without ever having heard anybody else's emotional vocalizations, or heard your own vocalizations, deaf people do produce vocalizations that are recognizable as communicating specific emotions. But they're not as clear to hearing listeners as hearing people's vocalizations, suggesting that learning does help to shape
I love it. Well, first of all, in my defense, Alan chose the title. I like to be provocative. You do, sir. But second of all, once again, we come back to this. There is no black and white. It is very nuanced. Yes, depending on your definition of innate, some things are, but not necessarily. I love that. I love that there is no definitive answer. I love that we can talk about what the answer may or may not be. One last follow up on that, because I was just wondering, did you ever pull from that study or from that experience any information in terms of how they know somebody else's emotional state? Because like we were saying earlier, I can detect a polite laugh versus a true laugh for them. Are they reliant on the other person volunteering the information or have they just in their experience developed their own approach or ways? Are they more tuned in to all the other data that humans are presenting when they're trying to understand someone's emotional state? Like, how does it work? I think that is always the case that you use information that is available to you. And so for sure, you're going to be relying on visual information, contextual information, verbal information, if you can lip read, for example. And clearly, people who are born profoundly deaf are fine in terms of social interaction. So they are capable of using a wide range of social cues in a way that seems to be beneficial for social interaction. So indeed, it's kind of fascinating that even though you can cut out an entire sense, it seems like for social functioning, there's so much redundancy in the system that it doesn't really cause major impairment, unlike something like speech, which if you don't hear is incredibly difficult to learn to produce spoken language in a way that is understandable to hearing people. Wow. There's so much we're still figuring out.
All right, we got to wrap things up. We're in the homestretch. Alan, you know what that means. I love looking ahead at the end. I love an optimistic eye on the horizon. Disa, what is something you're really excited about in the next five, let's say five, 10 years in your area of study? You think it could be groundbreaking and open up some doors, something that you're excited to come along and come down the pipe here. Give us some hope. I think a major development is the shift towards looking at naturally occurring everyday nonverbal expressions. So for a long time, literally for decades, researchers have been relying mainly on posed expressions, artificially kind of produced expressions. I've done that too in my own research. But more and more, we're getting into the kind of messy and complex real world situations, which both kind of metaphorically and literally are noisy, which is a challenge when you work with audio, of course. But I think that's a really important development that introduces a lot of new challenges. But I think it's getting us closer to understanding the things we actually want to know. And I also think more and more, people are getting interested in connecting this very fundamental research with real world questions to do with intergroup relationships or polarization in the political space or climate change. And so how can we connect what we know about how emotions work and how emotional expressions work with these pressing kind of societal problems? Oh, I love that. Alan, thank you for that. Alan, I always ask you to dream up some big AI tech development thing. It just occurred to me on our podcast about emotions. I don't know that I've asked you point blank about your excitement for the field of emotion science. You look 5-10 years ahead. What are you excited about in that area that's coming this way? I mean, I have to agree with Disa. I think that looking at the real world is really the... That should be the gold standard is that can you predict...
What's going to happen in real interactions when somebody forms an expression and what it means to them and what it means to the other person and how it is the kind of foundation of a relationship that's ongoing. And you can't really look at those things unless you have, you know, wide data, like lots of people, lots of examples and longitudinal data. And you can't easily code that data without having automated methods. We did this study of facial expressions, 6 million videos on YouTube, where we looked at how facial expressions relate to contexts. I would love to do something similar with vocal expressions. In fact, we're getting close to working on that. And we have the automated tools now to actually recognize vocal expressions. And not only whether somebody is forming a laugh or giggle, chuckle, and different subdivisions of laughter, but also, you know, what are the kind of more continuous dimensions of that. And we represent those in terms of the emotional associations people tend to have, but really they're just objective measures of the acoustic signal and how they can be embedded in a space that has these really nuanced emotional associations that are reliable. And so taking all of those measures of vocalizations and applying them at a large scale, I think is going to give us a lot of insight into how vocalizations actually function in the real world, which I think that's going to be really exciting. Sounds super exciting. As much as it pains me to say it, this is it. I got to wrap it up. Dr. Satter, thank you so much again. You've been incredibly generous with your time and it's just been absolutely fantastic to have you on the show. Thank you so much for doing this. Do you have a good time with us? I hope. It was delightful. Thank you. Oh, that was a polite response. Thank you for that. Alan, thanks for being here and making this whole thing possible, man, and being equally generous with your time as well, sir. I know you're super busy and so I love that we still get to do these and find the time for it. Thanks, Alan, for being here. Of course. No, this is the best thing I do. That was a very polite response. All right. So you two have been generous with your time. For those listening, let's be honest, you're probably like walking or on a train or doing laundry or something. So it's hard for me to say you've been as generous with your time as Alan and Thisa here.
You are listening. And though I may not sound like it, I appreciate that more than you'll ever know. So thank you, loyal listeners and fans out there. If you happen to have a question or a thought worth sharing, please send it this way. Even if it's not worth sharing, just send it. You can email us at thefeelingslab at hume.ai. That's T-H-E-F-E-E-L-I-N-G-S-L-A-B at H-U-M-E dot AI. And if it's good, and sometimes they are, then I might just get Alan to read it on the air. How about that? All right. That's going to do it for now. Farewell from all of us here at the feelings lab. I'm Matt Forte. Thanks again, everybody. And please stay safe out there.
