Hello world, what is up? Welcome to the Feelings Lab. I'm your host Matt 14, and on today's episode, man, we're talking about love. Now, if you're following us as we're creating these in real time and uploading them, then, you know, Thanksgiving is right around the corner. And if you've discovered our show a little later down the road and are listening in the future, well, then I guess just know that for us, Thanksgiving is right around the corner. And we here at the Feelings Lab found ourselves at a bit of a crossroads. You know, we could travel the well-trodden path and dive deep into anger, disappointment, frustration, rage, hostility, all the hits and contribute yet another conversation to the public discourse about surviving the holidays. Or, or, option B, bear with me here, we could go a little nostalgic. You know, back to what I remember Thanksgiving being all about when I was a kid. Beyond the homemade lasagna and awkward small talk with cousins that are practically strangers and Al Roker regaling us with tales of all the Macy's balloons that have taken out New York City lampposts. Thanksgiving, as I was reminded by a great group of friends just this past weekend, is about love. Now, I hear you screaming at the show already. Thanksgiving isn't about love. Valentine's Day is about love, dummy. First of all, don't be rude. Second of all, Thanksgiving, as the name suggests, is about being thankful. I don't know about you, but nine times out of 10, what am I thankful for if not a bunch of stuff that I love? And don't worry, just because I pulled a muscle trying to stretch today's theme into something topical doesn't mean we're going to narrow the focus. If we're talking about love, you best believe we're going to answer all the big questions. From Hathaway's What is Love? to finally finding out if the Beatles were right, and it truly is all you really need. That was terrible. I'm sorry I made that joke. Now, joining me to do all those things and more, my favorite sandwich. No, no, not the turkey stuffing cranberry combo we all can't wait to make next week. That's right around the corner. What I'm talking about, of course, is the doctor's sandwich. Dr. Alan Callen, Daniel Credit Cobb, and Dr. Dekker Keltner.
are of course, all here, but that's not all joining us today, a very special and exciting guest, you know, her from her sixth season run on CSI and why she's been in a bunch of shows, you love like Providence and the resident. She's a multiple daytime Emmy award nominee and is currently in production on a brand new comedy series called Greek candy, a show inspired by her family's 100 year old chocolate factory, which frankly sounds pretty amazing. Uh, please welcome to the show. The talented, the kind, the great Melina Kanakiridis is here. Melina, look at you. Oh my gosh. Okay. First of all, you said my name so well. Thank you. I wanted to make sure I nailed it. I'm happy. I did. Thank you so much for being here and being a part of our show. We're so excited to have you here. Danielle Dacker Allen. How are you guys feeling? Welcome back. That's great. Perfect. Perfect. Well, stoked to talk about candy. We're here to talk about candy. He talks so much in the beginning. I think you said we're here to talk about chocolate, right? It's entirely possible. Chocolate is absolutely going to come up. Chocolate, right? I mean, the two are, it's a short list, you know, love and chocolate kind of go hand in hand. That is something exactly. I want to get to that. I want to break that open. I want to find out why that is. And we will, I hope, I think if the, if the other episodes have led me to believe anything, I'm pretty sure we'll figure it out. We usually, we usually start with the definition but I'm curious for scientific purposes, you know, how many variations or categories of love have we established, you know, and for me, I know I love my dog in a different way than I love my friends versus my parents versus my wife. But, but, but before, before I get my science people to weigh in on that, Melina, it is my understanding that you speak Greek and much like the Inuit folks have multiple words for snow, I'm told in Greek, there are multiple words for love. Is that right? Did it correct? No, there's, there's discrepancy, whether it's seven or eight, I believe it's eight but you have to kind of combine what is ancient Greek philosophy, you know, Plato and Aristotle all have their philosophical beliefs, which tend to play true. And.
Yeah, we love a lot. We Greek people. And and it's, it's my favorite. And we'll get into all of them. I mean, I can tell you my favorite is philosophy, philia, friendship, the love of friendship. There's, there's a reason all the Greeks went into the hospitality business. They all own restaurants. And they, when you go to the, there are many beautiful countries, but people love to go to Greece, because there's this love of life and this love of, of, it's bigger than empathy. There is another word for empathy. But this one is friendship that is not about anything, but loving and lifting people. And it's a way of life for us. It can sometimes be overwhelming. Because, you know, we don't have one family member, we have about 375,000 family members, because once they become friends, strangers become friends, philia, philipi, philotimi, agapi, eros, eros is the love, erota, erota, everything in Greek, it sounds scary, like even Cana Kiritis, you look at it, and you're like, Oh, my God, there's so many letters. But it literally there are no silent letters. It's exactly as it's spelled. So when you hear erota, erota is the love, the romantic sexual love. That's the love for Valentine's Day. It's actually really appropriate, you're doing love for Thanksgiving, because the philotimi, the philia is all about what Thanksgiving is. We're bringing in people like my husband says, I collect people. Well, yeah, that's what you're supposed to do. So that's so appropriate with philia. Then you get into other ones. There's mania, like love that's gotten so crazy, that, you know, it goes the wrong way. Then there's like the older ones that ancient love, which is more the love of family, how you feel about your, your family or familial love. And then there's ludus, which is basically like a crush, a kid having a crush like
That sort of delicious feeling of really loving something for that moment. And then 30 seconds later, it's like, yeah, it's OK. You know, having raised two daughters who are still in the process, because, yeah, there's a lot of that. And then pragma, which is more of a enduring love. That's the love that's been around for years and years and years. And it's come to like an understanding, you know, and then my one of the other ones is Plato had Platia, which is more of like a platonic love, self-love or Aristotle. Actually, it was Aristotle. Plato's was, oh, no, Agape, Agape is my the main one. And Agape is just that's the empathetic love we love for strangers. We love everyone. And then the last one is self-love, which Aristotle said that if we can't in order to love others, we have to love ourselves first. It's a reflection of our own love. And that was also really big in the middle school years because, you know, I would be like that girl's mean because she's unhappy inside. She doesn't love herself. You know, just turn off the noise and have fun. So anyway, yeah, I talk too much. The professionals need to know what you said. You crushed that answer. Well, I have to do it. It's amazing. Zachar, please go ahead. Weigh in. Yeah, no, you know, it's so great to go to, you know, ancient Greece and it's it's wonderful treatments of love. And and, you know, I love Molina's kind of broad conceptual landscape. And this is where the maps are really useful, right? This kind of how do we sort out this space of love? Right. Which has many different reference. Humans love anything from sports shoes to, you know, cars to people. And I feel like I mean, just to, you know, part of this love desire is a big distinction that we got to get to. Like there's one that's really long term and it has devotion built into it. Authenticity and scientists have made some sense making sense of that. And then also, you know, the kind of the quick bursts of passions and sexual desire and infatuations that have really a different neurological structure to.
I love Melina, you know, emphasis on, and there, I loved an idea that she talked about that is friendship. You know, we often think of love and we go to like infatuations as a youthful person or spiritual love, agape or whatever it may be. But man, don't forget friendship. They become very prominent on Thanksgiving and really throughout the year. It's a really important love that needs more attention. So thanks for your we learned so much from taking one rich cultural perspective and then like seeing how they map it. And there's a lot of traction there. Well, that was that was my follow up that I was really curious about, especially to hear from you, Alan. You know, was that sort of the framework? They did all the hard work for you. There it is. Now you just got to find the pieces that fit in. Did you build off of that structure that was established? We, you know, science hasn't gotten that far into all those different kinds of love. I mean, love as a general theme is the feeling that you get when it comes to an emotion. I mean, it's also the feeling of the bonds that you form and the bond itself is called love. So there's there's some confusion there. But as a feeling, it's the feeling of strengthening or nurturing these lasting bonds. And you see neighboring emotions, self-love, pride. Most of the time, love properly has to do with loving something else, some other person. Sometimes it can be an idea. It's a lasting bond. There's also a border on kind of desire and desire can often involve a bond that doesn't last very long. So there's a difference there, of course, because it's just about forming bonds and humans form all kinds of bonds. And they're really, really complicated. There's going to be a lot of different kinds of love. There's love in the family. There's friendship. There's love between romantic partners. You think of romance. All of these things can be felt sort of personally or empathetically. It's all kinds of movies that are themed on different kinds of love. In fact, probably more than half the movies are themed on some kind of love. And that's generally the theme. So it's incredibly central emotion, regulates everything in our societies, because we.
We rely on commitments and trust in lasting relationships. But yeah, there's different sounds. You can think of it as the different sounds of love, there's the sound of infant-directed speech from parents, which is really characteristic, which is like adoration, but then it's a speech component of that. There's a sound for romantic partners. It's really funny because that sound can also be sympathy, and then that borders on disappointment. It's interesting how those relationships happen. Anyway, I'll stop talking, but there's a bunch of things to say there. Guys, we are only less than like 10 minutes in and there's so much going on that I want to unpack and dig into. This is great. Malina, I want to come back to you because there were so many great bits in your opening answer to my question there. You mentioned- Including, may I interrupt you today? Please do. Go for it. That Aristotle, I feel like all of his books should be taken out of the philosophy section of the bookstore and put in personal growth. I love what you were just talking about, self-love, come on, Kristin Eppen and Aristotle. 100% agree. Who said that? No. No, I can't agree more. In fact, I'm an actor, but my life growing up, I would go to Greece in the summers when my parents could afford it. I grew up in Akron, Ohio, family of a candy business, chocolate maker. Grandfather came over when he was 18 and all he knew how to do was dip chocolates. He got stuck on Ellis Island, had an uncle in Youngstown or somewhere in Ohio, close to Akron, started selling those chocolates on the street corner until he made enough money to rent a shop, eventually buy the store, then get stuck during World War II in Greece for seven years. And with his family, my mom ended up growing up in Greece. It was all during World War II. They tell incredible stories. My grandfather was allowed out after curfew. This is all coming back to love.
A man who spoke a little bit of every language, he spoke a little bit of English, a little bit of German. So when the Germans occupied Greece, he was allowed to go out past curfew because he would bring in the sugar and the flour rations. He had a bunch of bags, you know, burlap bags in the back of his truck, and he saw a little pair of shoes hiding behind bushes, and kind of turned the wheel because the lights would go with the wheel. Turned out there were a family of five, three kids and the parents hiding from the Germans. And he hid this family in his basement for two months until they got him out the borders of Yugoslavia, and into safety. And then literally a week after they left, they put a German soldier in their house as a to live there. So everything could have gone wrong. But that's like the worst times I'm thinking about, like, in my lifetime, I have not experienced. I mean, maybe the towers coming down and maybe this pandemic thing, but it's nowhere near what our family experienced during that time. Coming back to love, it's my grandmother, as I would, I had the blessing of having her in my life till she was 97. And she would say to me, you know, we are all much more alike than we are different. And a mother's love is a mother's love and a father's love is a father's love. And that family was our family, you know, so how could we not help each other. And so I, I was raised with this whole philosophy, you know, like, I incidentally, Aristotle's school is right by our house analysis in northern Greece. And when they found Philip the Great's to Alexander the Great's father, Philip of Macedon, I was there that summer. And I got to meet the archaeologist, I had the magazine that he signed for me. And it was just fascinating. And I used to play hide and go seek. And like in the Aristotle school.
So it was so fun. I think you're so right. It's so important that people see the sort of humanity of his science. I mean, the millions of other things that he came on to. But yes, I mean, it's all stemming from love and all kind of historically important to me, kind of how we were raised. Were you having, first of all, thank you for sharing all that's amazing. Sorry. Those stories are incredible. No, great. This is a podcast. It's a venue for big, long stories. Never apologize, please. But what I'm thinking as I'm hearing this, it's just you grew up. We've heard about how important it is just to your culture, how important it was specifically to your family, how important. Did you ever go through a phase where you almost rebelled against it because it was so prominent and everywhere? Or was it just so easy and natural and it just always felt right for you and you and you kind of fell right into it? Like this was this was how we are. This is how we should be. Or was there a point where you were like everyone with the love enough already? Like, did you ever reach that point and you're like, no? Absolutely. I mean, I think I think I think you do. You lose your mind because everybody's it's wonderful and it's beautiful. And yeah. But it's also a pain in the butt because you're constantly, you know, constantly being told how to do things, what to do. And it's all out of love. And it doesn't matter how old you are. You know, my mom calls me every day. What are you doing? Are you eating? You know, you know, I'm old. She's 85. But I have my own kids. And yes, it can be exhausting. But but I think even the rebelling against it, it's so it all depends, like what kind of love like I fell in love with my husband. I was 19 years old. He was he was a Greek boy. I basically broke up with him, like right when I wanted to go to New York to become an actress because he's such a good guy. He needed a nice Greek girl, you know, somebody who was going to cook and clean for him. And he was going to get to do whatever he wanted. And I wanted to be an actor more than I wanted to be a good Greek wife. You know, that's appalling. What are you talking about? And he was, you know, it's just it can be overwhelming.
But at the same time, yeah, I can't, I can't think of life any other way. Otherwise, I get depressed, you know, like I just need to think. My mom always said, make your own good time, you know, just keep, keep going, wake up every morning and find a reason that makes you happy and makes you want to keep going. Find a solution. That's a, you know, this is one of the themes in our, throughout our discussions with the different emotions in the podcast, like the emotions have upsides and downsides. And, you know, you have cultures that are devoted to love and you go to Greece and it's everywhere. And then your mom's calling you all the time when you want to be an independent adult and all these upsides and downsides. And that, I mean, you know, anyway, in many ways, that's the, those are the challenges of identity, you know, is how do we, how do we locate ourselves with these great passions that our family and culture give us? And it's, it's always full of surprises, you know, and it's neat to hear Melina, your story, because people are like, God, I just, the one thing U.S. society needs is just more love. Sometimes love is hard though, because in order to really love someone, you have to tell the truth. And I don't know about you guys, but I think every family has some, some bad shit going down. And there are times where if you really love them, you know, the cliche tough love, but it's true. And that part's not fun. You know, that's, that's the difficulty. Thanksgiving dinner is looking mighty tricky. I already said we weren't having that discussion deck or we're not doing that episode. I think learning from Alan though, what's so interesting about defining it as the bond, the strengthening or nurturing of the lasting bond is it's like almost the, the tough lives within the container of the love, because the love is there to hold you. And the moment where you say, this is raw. This is real. This is not comfortable. We're going to go there. It's going to suck.
And then it's okay, because this is what we're held by. So I'm like, I don't think I put those two things together until until this where it's like, that's why that's why love is such a healing force. I find like, especially when it's like, I'm sure part of me as you were like, giving that beautiful like retinue map of in the like, the lived bloodline map of love through the Greek culture is, it's like, the, it made me wonder, is there a word of love that's for like the Greek people in Greek culture? Is there a special term reserved for or would that fall under agape? No, it would be philotomy. The one I started with. Philotomy. Right. Philotomy, it's more than just friendship. It's, if you say the best compliment to give someone, it's kind of like honorable as well. It's a mix. It's, it's, it's a mix of all of that. Because you are, you are thinking outside of yourself, you are you are reaching out to create friendships to create bonds to basically go, Hey, come here. If you fall, I'll catch you. I'm a stranger. It doesn't matter. Or I'll set you on a path. Like, come break bread, eat with us, you know, that's what we know how to do. We can feed you. And then we can figure your problems out and make a solution. You know, it's, it's, it's more than hospitality. It's reaching out and trying to do the things that are right. Not just for yourselves and your own family, but for the greater good. Agape is like that as well. But agape has kind of turned into an overall huge catch all word for love. Whereas philosophy is something special. And it's you know, when you meet somebody and you go, Oh, my gosh, they just, they just kind of exude that light that you kind of go, I feel safe with this person. I don't know why I connect. You feel like home to me. That's, that's the goal. And not all Greeks have it. But as a majority, that's sort of what they aim for, what they strive for. That makes sense.
I'm so sorry. I'm so excited about this. I was actually listening to, I don't know if we're allowed to mention other podcasts on our podcast, but I was listening to Krista Tippett and Jason Reynolds, who's the Library of Congress's sort of person who holds literature for young people and does incredible work there. And he was talking about, she was like, what's your definition of anti-racism? And what was beautiful is he was describing what you described in the way he described it. He said, you know, it's simply the muscle inside of us that says humans are human, that says, I love you because you remind me more of myself than not. And I love what you're talking about. It's that that greater collective being that lives inside of us in this collective heart. I'm like, oh, yeah, sorry. So now me. Matt, I keep interrupting you. That's not love. I love that you're interrupting me because it makes for a great show. So it's all good. But thank you. You didn't have to apologize. One of the things I'm just thinking of, though, in one of the thoughts that I was kind of banging around in my head, and I feel like it's related to where we are in the conversation, is some some emotions we say you have a choice. Like, you're not necessarily in terms of that emotion in the initial phase, but how you hold on to it and how long you engage with it. And we can choose to be loving. But there is an element where you there's certain there's a type of love that we cannot choose to engage, that we cannot explain. It's it's the most ineffable of all. You know, it's the kind of you think of unrequited love where I love someone, but they don't love me back in the same way or or not to bring up Ted Lasso for the four millionth time. But season one, two people who love each other, but not the way they want to love each other. And it's so hard for them because they can't make it work. And I recognize the scope of the question I'm about to ask here. But do we have any idea of what it is that dictates that difference? But why we can't choose to love someone, you know, we can choose to be loving. But there is a certain thing that we can't put our finger on, but we know it when we feel it. What do we have scientifically about that? Do we have anything? We just going for the ride. There's a chemical response in the brain that is it's spawned unconsciously. You can't say I'm going to feel.
Feel this burst of oxytocin in specific kinds of brain regions that we see when mothers are talking to their infants, and skin-on-skin contact is a really big touch, and certain kinds of vocalizations activate it. You can't choose for it not to be activated by that. It just happens. And then once you have that, there's this... And it's hard to see it, it's hard to do these experiments in humans, but if you look at variables, which are a model for pair bonding, because they actually form lasting monogamous relationships, the act of meeting their mate actually changes their brain permanently. And there's more oxytocin receptors in the place where the oxytocin receptors are correlated with the degree of pair bonding permanently, and they can't, you know, I'm sure that's not something they control either, you know, it's your body's response that you've evolved to force you into these relationships so that you will, you know, nurture your offspring and so forth. Interesting. I like it when you say your body's forced you into it. Because I'm constantly looking for the evolutionary reason, like, why? Why do we do this? I know it feels good, but why have we done it for so long? Why is it such a core tenet of being a human being? And that's a very interesting perspective on it. Thank you for that. Dakar, what were you about to say? Yeah, I mean, it's I mean, in the kind of in the there's there are economic analyses of this as well. And they're interesting other neuroscientific findings that a lot of our life's about just self-interest, right, and going after what I want and maximizing, you know, my gains don't care about other people's expenses or costs that I incur upon them. And love changes all the calculus of that of your life, right? You have to sacrifice. You have to give up opportunities for other things. Oops. If you have offspring, you have to get spit up on and stay up late and, you know, lose your sex life and your social life and everything. And love comes in through oxytocin and washes over you. And you're like, this is all amazing, you know, and it is. But it is this, you know, we need these mechanisms that turn us from being these gratification self-interest machines to caring and loves one of the first.
And there are cool studies showing it's so interesting that when you feel deep love, this part of your brain, the amygdala, which is involved in a lot of things, including like detecting threat and protecting the self, just shuts down. And so when you're feeling love, you're like, you know, you throw yourself into a new life, which is what we need to do. Yeah. Here's the big question to go back to what we started here on the show. If I have a piece of chocolate, does that activate the oxytocin? Is that what's happening? For real? It is. I think so. Yeah, they're like, I think I've heard hot sauce and chocolate are chocolate boosters of oxytocin. Interesting. One of my questions specifically, you know, why have we linked chocolate so tightly with love and desire? Like, why not? I don't know. Carrots. You know, like, what was it about? I don't know. Carrots is a weird one. But you get my point. It's so specific. You cannot think of chocolate and not think of love. They're so linked together. And part of that's probably the marketing. But also we feel it. Kisses. Now that is some marketing. I'm sure a lot of it is marketing, but it's fascinating to hear that it's possible there's a little bit of science behind it as well. That's really interesting. I can honestly say, yeah, I'm, you know, obviously coming from a Greek family that owns chocolate factory. So I had an interview once where it was a bad interview where the guy said it was really bad. It was a stupid question. I was like, when did you know you were famous? And I was like, OK, that's a bizarre thing to say. And I go, probably the third grade. And he's like, what? And I go, yeah. And I would bring my grandfather and he would come in with chocolate, like a huge chunk of chocolate and just a hammer and a pick. And the entire school would come in because it was like a 10 pound bar or something. And they'd all get like chunks of chocolate and everybody's like, who's that? That's a Greek girl.
But it does like kids were so like, people, everybody, there's, there's something about maybe there's a reason why we always go, hey, give me some sugar, you know, give me a kiss. Give me you know, it's the sweetness. Maybe there is a chemical that you know something, but I think you bring joy to people. You know, somebody can be in a really bad mood. And you it's like a gift. It's kind of the same way as food, you know, there's sort of, I mean, it was interesting listening to the, the triggers of, you know, the natural instinct of moms loving their babies and that unconditional love. And I think there's, there's a connection to sort of even music, like singing music, you were saying different sounds about, you know, I think part of our family, it's always and I think part of my life, it makes me happy again to not just chocolate and food, but hearing beautiful music or singing together or dancing, or, you know, when you're utilizing your mind and your heart and your physicality, you know, a lot of it, like my girls made fun of me. They couldn't wait till COVID was over quarantine. Not so much because it was horrible and we all enjoyed it, but I kept kissing them over and over. Like, I wouldn't stop hugging them. So they got me a dog, I love you mom, but you know, can you stop kissing me so much? But I think to like touch and, you know, it's like so important. And I hope that once we get past all this, we'll hug again and, and touch people and, you know, yeah, for sure. I just went on a whole tangent. Sorry. I love it. No, this is great. You were talking about food and the significance of food and the connection to food. And I was thinking about this earlier too. And it's like, well, okay, with food, I think like we need fuel, right? We cannot live unless we eat. It is a biological necessity. And so it's interesting to me that we cross those wires, that we have this physical necessity and it overlaps in our brains with, with this emotion. So I wonder like, is that enough to suggest that love is an emotional necessity?
In the way that food is a physical necessity, right? Like we need to experience love as human beings. You know, Dakar, you talked about how the oxytocin comes in to help us sort of sugarcoat all those other things that come with having a child. But you know, in everyone's experience, would you consider love? Love is an emotional necessity. It has to exist. It has to be. Alan, what do you think? Is love an emotional necessity? I'm putting you on the spot. Well, there's terrible experiments where, there's very few experiments on humans where you can deprive somebody of love, right? But you're asking if it's a necessity, you know, if it's a necessity, then people can't do without it. If you raise monkeys without mothers, or you don't give them the opportunity to have skin on contact, they're basically, they become dysfunctional completely. They don't eat, they just wither away. So yeah, in that sense, definitely. And I would probably think that other forms of love are also necessities in the sense that our bodies are built to seek out, you know, pair bonds. We want to be able to raise offspring. That's an evolutionary imperative. And so if we don't have that, there's probably a signal that something's missing. Um, so not necessarily that it's for everybody. Maybe some people can get that without them. But I do think that there is a biological imperative there. Those poor monkeys. But thank you for sharing that with us. I'm glad you prefaced it with that. It was a terrible study. I was at least emotionally ready to hear that. The other thing I was thinking about, Melina, when you were talking, you mentioned, give me some sugar. I went to find a list of just how many pet names you think of how you refer to your loved ones, right? There's sugar, there's sweetie, there's pumpkin, there's honey, there's jelly beans, muffin, peanut, you keep going. There's a million of them. And we just have all these fun little nicknames, these terms of endearment. And then I only bring this up because there was one that I'm hoping is familiar to you. And forgive me, I don't speak Greek. I barely mastered English. And it's supposedly a common term of endearment in Greek, meaning my little green bean. And it's F-A-S-O-L-A-K-I.
That's very funny. When you put Aki after every name, it's like my love. So I'm to my family, I'm Melinaki or Melinamu. Mu, my Melina, right? So it's like Zoemu, Karinamu, these are my kids. Or like I'll say Karinaki. Yeah, it's it. Yes. Fasolaki means you're my little bean. I love it. Yeah, there was, it was specific. I don't know how I stumbled upon specifically like the Greek terms of endearment, but I found out like this is perfect. I must bring this up tonight. Thank you for it. Yeah. After tonight, you'll be my little fasolaki. How's that? That is an honor and a privilege, madam. Oh my goodness. I'm blushing. Somebody take over. Ask a question. All right. Here's a fun pivot. Dakar, a couple of times now in our pregame chats, uh, you've casually tossed out there. You always, for almost every emotion you've gone, we could talk about psychedelics and it never really made it all the way to the show, but you always bring it up. And I feel like now's a great time. I want to indulge. I want to talk about psychedelics. Uh, you know, I think of the summer of love. I think of people, you know, blissed out of their minds. And I'm curious to get your thoughts. Is the love that one may experience in that state a byproduct of the, of the chemistry of the drug and therefore some way inauthentic or, or are the drugs allowing you access to something that you may not have been able to get to otherwise for whatever reason, what can you tell me? Are you asking Dakar, the scientist or Dakar, the mystic or all of the above? I'm not asking Alan who wants to talk on the record. I know you won't tell me about your experience with psychedelics if there is any, but I, I want to ask Dakar in all of his, every facet of Dakar, give me the knowledge. What do you got, sir? What can you tell me? Well, you know, I, I think it's important we talk about this because they're here. Uh, 25, 30 million Americans are trying, you know, one of
The kinds of psychedelics from psilocybin, LSD, ayahuasca, ketamine, etc. And they're good for certain conditions of suffering. Veterans are very interested in this for as one example. And, you know, part of I think it really is what Melina talked about earlier, which is agape, like you, you know, psychedelics aren't about desire, romantic love. They're about this deep love of life, you know, living forms and fellow human beings you don't know. And I you know, the question of authenticity is a deep one. And a lot of the real deep practitioners from the Dalai Lama to indigenous Mayan traditions just see psychedelics as one root of many and really want us to be thinking about how do we build a life that gets to Melina's characterization earlier of like, there are all these loves that I could fill my my day with. Right. But I don't think it's inauthentic. I think it shuts down your self focus. Parts of the brain opens you up to how marvelous life is, you know, and how how core it is to love things. So I think it's an exciting development in our culture. I'm happy to talk about psychedelics. Open the door. The reason I say that is. Are you on them right now? Yes, I say that is because the modern tea I've been drinking. I'm getting stressed right now. It'll probably be pink right at the end. And I'll just have hung all of you. I'm going to get my drum. Oh, my goodness. Like that fabulous. What was his name? And Saul, the woman like was the science spinner. Anyway, I digress. It's the mushrooms. No. No, the reason the reason I actually think that's a powerful question is dear friend, you know, dear friend and spiritual teacher, but also literally the person by which I met the love of my life. He married my husband and I.
His whole journey is this arc. And what's beautiful about his kind of hero's journey living this arc is that he started out as this kind of decorated psychology professor, and then ran into Tim Leary at Harvard and started started working with psychedelics. And then, you know, that part of the story is kind of infamous history. But what's beautiful is when he talked about that journey, he talked about how expansive it was and how he dropped himself. And really, it's this inducement of awe and oceanic love. And then what's so amazing about that is he felt that he went on many heroes journeys with the medicine itself. And then he got to the point where he'd done it so many times that he was like, you go up, but you always come down. And this is where it's it's the thing that shows you the map, but it doesn't take you to the mapmaker. And so the thing is, how do you get there on your own? And so his shift from scientist to spiritual teacher was because he went to the he went to India and seek of the map, like the real map and the real mapmakers, and thought perhaps like the kind of ancient science that was living there could give him some of those answers. And when he went, he met his guru, he was, you know, had an experience with him that completely meant melted his mind is incredibly well formed, the loved mind of his. And then he felt his experience of what he called unconditional love that is the spiritual love, this transcendent love. And it just, he lost himself in that love. And then that became the teaching for the rest of his life. So he was like, you know, the professor turned into this other teacher. And what I think is beautiful about that is this idea that it's like, how do you get to the place where you don't come down? And so psychedelics will get you into that room, but they'll kick you out. So I think the practices of kind of love and awareness and being like, I know, by the time I met him in the very last year of his life, it was like, you would sit in his presence. And it was just this oceanic wash of love where you kind of dissolved into it. And that's where when I look at the way that you can be in the presence of that, and it can be its own force, and you can fill it kind of writ large. But then when you think about the all of the descriptions that Molina was saying, or
For the description of the atomic unit of love, which is that bond, I think what's so powerful is whatever way you slice it or feel it, whether it's for your touch, whether it's for your words, like the languages of us understanding and feeling love, what I think is powerful is that all of that is in there. And it's just what's your doorway, what's your place in the arc? How far are you going to take it? Can you apply it to yourself and the people around you? Can you practice that more? How far out can you stretch it? Like when Sharon Salzberg talks about her work, she's like, heart as wide as the world. And that's like, so yummy. And I love that there's a bridge between science and that vast mystery beyond it. Beautiful. Got it. Try mushrooms. Absolutely beautiful. Talking about the language of love. One of this may be a silly question, but it was something we had talked about a little bit earlier and I'm interested in, and it's just all the different metaphors that are out there. There is a theme. You can be crazy in love. You can be lovesick. You can be madly in love. And we may be drifting into the psychology here, which we often do, but those terms exist because they work. Right. We all connect to them. And why is that? That's what clicks for us. That it's madness or disease that when we talk about, when we try to describe love, where do we think that comes from? I see Alan thinking, I see his eyes up there, he's poking around, he's got an answer. Well, you know, I think it makes you vulnerable. And so it's almost like this weird addiction that seems like sometimes it actually is an addiction. It's a problematic addiction. You can be in love with somebody and there's abusive relationships. You still feel love, but it is literally a kind of a sickness. And that I think that kind of love is this kind of more immediate kind of attachments and need and a fear of losing something and comes with its own anxieties. There's this negative part of it too, where you have to, it's almost like a fear that keeps you in it. Like the anxiety of losing this thing that keeps you in that relationship.
Hampshire, and is something that people talked about as being associated with love. It's a negative association with love that goes back long time back to like the stoics. Like you have the Greek philosopher, who was actually against love in some ways. He thought it was a form of earthy attachments and he was saying, you haven't achieved the stoic version of Nirvana, which is kind of peace of mind, until you're ready to feel your wife off the boat or I can't remember the exact quote was something weird like that. Which is kind of extreme, but there used to be some more things in Buddhism because love is sort of... I haven't heard of the guru that does the throw your wife off your boat practice. Yeah. It's not seeming like a sign of enlightenment to me. That's a beautiful form of non-attachment. Anyway, Adam, who's come to you? I would say, yeah, I mean, it's a weird line, but when you read it in context, it makes a little bit more sense. Are you the boat throwing guy? I don't know. I'm curious. His philosophy is almost exactly the same as Buddhism. Anyway. There's more boats and more wife. Yeah. Buddha said weird things too. Buddha said things about kind of rejecting earthly attachments that were kind of strange. And I think it's because of that sort of dark side where you fear the part of the attachments, you fear losing it and you protect it and makes you vulnerable to those kinds of things. I think that's almost the opposite of what we're just talking about with the psychedelics, which is sort of this enlightened form of love where you can take a step back from those attachments and take a step back and look at yourself almost from a third person kind of point of view and see what really matters and throw away the negative parts, positive parts and realize that everybody feels it to each other and all that kind of stuff. So I think, yeah, I think there is an element of the sickness of love there. And I don't want to cut anybody off. That's all clinically speaking. Yeah, I have a question. I have some thoughts. Go for it. Throw it out there. Are you talking when you're talking about the attachments, are you talking about attachments to people and that love? Or are we talking about things? Are we talking about money and homes and drugs and alcohol, like the attachment? Where are we here? Because I got a little mania.
Like we said, manic love is not a good love. There's a great word in Greek. It's called megalomania. And this is what brings down a lot of people. Megalomania is about, uh, you have big thoughts. You got, it's like keeping up with the Joneses. You know, you're never going to be as there's always somebody wealthier or somebody more successful or somebody. And if you're constantly, it's very kind of intertwined with jealousy and all those other emotions and things that, that bring you down. So that's the kind of love that gets us date. It's dangerous. Um, is that what you're talking about? And when you talk about being, I mean, that's the Buddhists and the stoics kind of put them in the same bucket, but I do think that there's something unique about love people that is, you know, the, the heights of it are extreme and the lows of it are extreme. So often the most extreme examples of, I guess, mania probably in those relationships, mania. Yeah, man. That's my bad. It's like, I'd say I got me because that's how it is. I never knew, like my friends, when they were, uh, Russian sororities and stuff, they're like, do the Greek alphabet with me. And I'm like, okay. Yeah. Totally makes sense. I mean, it's, it's so fascinating. It's so complicated and I mean, not to revert back, but when you said, were there ever times that you, you weren't happy with all this love fest? Um, it's more than just the pain in the ass of everybody being in your business. It's, uh, it's also that sort of, I used to call it the good girl syndrome, you know, like I, I had to, I had to be a good girl, you know, a good Greek girl, a good Greek girl would never lie, would never do this, would always take care of her family first, you know, and even to a point where it's stupid, you know, like there were a lot of good Greek girls in my family, my aunts and uncles, great aunts that should have never stayed married, you know, but they did because that's.
And that's the way they were supposed to. And it created problems for kids later, you know, and it was interesting as I grew up, I sort of went, Oh, this is really good. And it's sort of disguised in a in a I love you sort of package. And, and that's, you know, those are the downsides of, of sort of an openness. Yeah, it's interesting, because as you grow up, you, you kind of, the world sort of teaches you what else is out there. Like, I always joke, I am still I've been in Hollywood for, I've been in this business for 30 years. And it's Thank God, love me back. But I still have an optimism that everybody's good until they prove themselves bad. You know, I have a healthy, not not fear, but a healthy question, you know, like, I'm cautiously optimistic, you know, I'll be cautious. Whereas before, I might have been like, Hey, I love you. Now I'm kind of like, Okay, hold on, let me put my foot in the water a little bit. Yeah, for a second. But it's, it's interesting, because you learn to sort of pull back a little bit and pull back a little bit, just to be careful. Yeah. I mean, it's so what I love about this show is we've brought in all the complexity of love, right? That it can be it can be a sickness, it can be, you know, Molina's talking about this other approach to emotions, which is they are like these roles and culture puts us into these roles of like, this is how you love. You love that guy over there and and your parents, and it's in a certain hierarchical structure. And part of societal evolution is where you challenge these conceptions of emotions, right? And we think about, is that really what love should be, you know, and it's so interesting how, how the inquiry into the emotions leads to surprising complexity like that, which is really revealing. For sure. I was hearing too, Molina, what you're saying that's really interesting is like, there's, there's this experience of conditional love.
If you're the good Greek girl, then I love you. If you're like this, then I love you. That conditionality is the kind of like the shadow human part within the unconditional love, which is I love you because I love you because love is really all there is when you're left with it. And so it's like these are the shearing forces that make our struggles and make our healing. It's like, how do you work towards the unconditional? Is that a platonic ideal? How do we live into that in the messy humanity of it all? It's like that's the juice. And it's also, it's not, it's, it's part of why I'm having such a great time writing this comedy about my family because it could be Greek, it could be Italian, you could be Chinese, you could be whatever. And it's the same ideals. It's the, it's the, it's hilarious. I love my mother-in-law, but I swear to God, she's, you know, still to this day, I've been married for 29 years. I was, I was like, I told you about my husband. But my mom, my mother-in-law still tell me you're so lucky. You're so lucky. You got the best, the best of my boys. You know, it's wonderful. And it's good, Melina, you try. You try, you know. She's going to be the star of the show. You know, she's, she's delicious and hilarious and, you know, smart and tough woman. That's wonderful. There's, before we, we're coming into the homestretch and there's a segment that we have to get to, but Alan, you mentioned there was a piece in what you had said, people are sort of afraid of losing and losing love and the loss of love. It's one of the scariest things. It's the most devastating thing. And, you know, I was hesitant to go this way because I wanted to keep it fun and light. But I do want to ask this question, which is, you know, some of the most devastating, difficult to navigate feelings in my life have come at the loss of love, you know, be it a family member or my buddy Doozer on the wall back there is my first dog of my life. And yeah, I'm drifting, obviously a little bit more towards grief at this point, but evolutionarily speaking, you know, we're bound to experience loss, right? It's going to happen. It's inherent. So yeah, in your studies, your experience in.
And in general, why then is it so damn hard if it's something that is inevitable, that we're going to go through and it's going to happen over and over again? Why have we not evolved to make it a slightly less bitter pill to swallow? It's one of the most difficult things to get through. That's a good question. Evolution doesn't work to make us happier, sadly. I mean, we can we can play with what we've evolved with to be happy. And that's sort of what all this philosophy is about, is how do you live a happy life given the imperfections of our biologies? But, you know, the reality is that these emotions evolve, love evolved to put us into long term bonds and to strengthen them and to form the kind of commitments where you're willing to personally sacrifice. You're willing to your expression of love indicates your willingness to sacrifice things for the other person. So there's a pain in that, but then there's also a pain in sort of losing these this person once you form that bond with them, because the bond is a biological imperative to sort of continue to strengthen and build that relationship over time. And to protect that person, honestly, you know, like the bond, it forces you to care about that person's well-being. And so it's a loss when you when you feel that loss, it is a very poignant kind of loss. And that all makes sense from a biological perspective. It doesn't make our lives easier. I think evolution works that way in some ways. Evolution has picked the moments that are most important to make our lives harder, because those are the ones where we really need to exert effort in order to achieve the biological imperative. Yeah, that makes sense. I love what you just said. I love what you just said, because it's going to be painful, obviously. But when you talk about the bonds that we create, I think, you know, it's all about what we're doing right this second. It reminds us because we've all suffered loss, right? We've all suffered a loss at some point or another.
And we will continue to have loss because that's what life is. But if we take every second that we have, that we are with those people that, you know, we gravitate towards, we love, we create love with, we have these bonds, even some of our frenemies, as my girls and I used to call them, you know, where we can't stand these people, but we love them because they're, you know, why do we love the bad guy in the movie? Because, you know, there's always something about someone that connects you in some way. So I tend to make the most of what I can and what is wonderful not to bring my culture up again. You guys are probably sick of hearing my Greek stuff, but, you know, if it's Groundhog's Day, you know, whatever, I remember being with the family and finding a reason to celebrate and eat and have fun and do things together. And I guess the most we can do to share moments with the people that we love in this time and find the ways we can bond as opposed to the ways we, you know, disconnect, it'll still be hard when we lose them. But boy, we have a plethora of memories and joy of life that there are no regrets from when we were living to the fullest. Does that make sense? Yeah. It's beautiful. That's what's so beautiful about the word courage or the word courage and it's in French is at the root of that, there's a courageousness in loving. And that's why core that literally means heart is at heart because at the core of that word, because it's like, this is a, it's a muscle you, it is a, it is something that you use and work and, you know, aches and everything else. But I love that, that the effort is the reason why we're alive. Like that's so beautiful, Alan and Melina, the way you've strung that together. Beautiful indeed. Thank you for that. All right. Alan, let's do it. It's the end of the show. You know what that means? You gave me a little bit with the bull stuff. Actually, I don't think I want to hear any more about those poor monkeys. Tell me about the bulls that they've made for life. They're, they, they fight each other. Tell me. Tell me who's been carrying that sally of bulls.
Melina, as I don't know if you saw or not, but we typically end the show, Alan will tell me how the emotion we've discussed is represented or observed within the animal kingdom. And so we've reached that point. And please tell me something adorable, Alan, let's go, what do you got? Yeah, I mean, so voles are a species, prairie voles in particular, are a species that scientists study because they pair bonds, they have monogamous relationships, and they're different from rats, mice, and other rodents, most other rodents in that way, most other rodents don't really bond with the other, the conspecific they mate with, it's just kind of a very functional relationship. Whereas prairie voles, you know, they stay together, they raise their children together. And you can see why that happens in the brain chemistry is really interesting. They have oxytocin receptors in the nucleus accomptans, which is one of the regions response is a dopaminergic region. So I talked about dopaminergic stuff, one of the other episodes, but it's one response, very responsible for addiction, habit formation. And so this, this sort of social interaction, oxytocin inducing social interactions, habit forming thing, or prairie voles, and it's somewhat intuitive why that is. And so that makes them very interesting species to study. You can see the same sort of brain chemistry activated in other non-monogamous rodents, but mostly for fileal relationships, so mothers and infants, and you see those sorts of changes happening in the brain at a critical period where the mother is huddling the pups. And it's literally the skin on skin contact that mediates the brain response and the permanent alterations of brain chemistry that cause that pup to want to seek out their mother over time and their brothers and sisters and cuddle with them and sleep next to each other. You can see the chemistry of these bonds forming and similar in humans. So that love definitely happens in animals. Another really good example of love in animals is infants erected prosody or vocalization,
Which you see across every culture in humans, in every culture mothers speak to their infants in the same way. The infants kind of babble. The mother is just compelled to make that mother-ese. I was conducting this research this morning. Exactly. And it's just compulsive and you don't see it in all other mammals. You don't see it, for example, in chimps or bonobos. You do see it in certain other mammals, for example, in even bats. It's been observed in seals. In bats, it's hypersonic. Ultrasonic, so you have to lower the frequency, but it sounds like, you know, similar to mother-ese. It's kind of a weird high-pitched thing and the infant is babbling and they're kind of huddling together. And it's a really important interaction. And you see that in seals and some other random mammals. And it's associated with that oxytocin response too. That's another connection. In humans, it's also associated with oxytocin. That vocalization itself induces an oxytocin response in the infant, which is really interesting. Awesome. Love drugs. Perfect. So, I also had to Google prairie bull because I was like, what does this animal look like? Is it lovable? Prairie bulls are absolutely adorable. They're nice. Why? I googled as well. Very cute. Very cute, yeah. It's like a pooch ball with eyes. It's like really kind of fun. Exactly. For our younger listeners, a pooch ball was a toy in the 90s and 80s. I don't know if they still have them. I haven't seen one in a while, but it looks like a prairie bull. Sadly, that is, unfortunately, all the time we have. A little then some even, but this was too good to cut short. I had a ton of fun with all of you. I got to wrap things up. First and foremost, a chocolate factory sized thank you to our special guest, Malina. It was just so wonderful to have you. Thank you so much for making time and sharing all those incredible stories. Just an absolute delight. Where should people keep an eye out for Greek Candy? How much time until we get to see the show? We're developing and writing right now. We're on episode two. It's with IMDb TV, which is owned by Amazon.
And Sony is the studio, so keep your fingers crossed and look out there. You guys are awesome. I love you all, even my Fasolagi. Wish you all a beautiful Thanksgiving. Enjoy your families and meet some new ones. Great being with you all today. Thank you. So sweet. Thank you. We really appreciate it. Thank you so much. And thank you to the literal brains behind this entire operation. Danielle, Alan, Dacher, always a pleasure. I say it every time. I mean it. There is no show without you. And thank you to you, our listeners. That's right. Plural. John Hodgman, we did it. A special shout out, especially to Lauren, Brendan and Ryan and all my friends and buds over at the Breakfast Club for supporting the show and listening. I went to a Friendsgiving just recently, this was past weekend, and I was shocked to find that literally practically everyone there listens to the show. It was engaging in conversations about it. It moved me. It means a lot to myself, as I'm sure it does to everyone working on the show. So thank you to them and to really everyone who's listening to the show. I'm very thankful for everyone that's joined us along this journey so far this year. You know, as the year comes to a close, so does season one of The Feelings Lab. We've only got one more episode left this year, and I'm telling you, you don't want to miss it. That's coming a little bit later in December. This is also your last chance. If you have any questions, comments, or just want to vent, you know, we're always here to listen. Email us at thefeelingslabathume.ai. You know what's about to happen. I'll put it right down here. Thefeelingslabathume.ai. Farewell for now. From all of us at The Feelings Lab, I'm Matt Fazzalotti-Forte. Have a wonderful Thanksgiving, everybody, and please stay safe out there.
