Hello, world. What is up? Welcome back to the Feelings Lab. I'm your host Matt Forte, and on today's episode, we're talking about emotions and the brain. Now, one of the things we've briefly touched on in the past here on the show is the physiological responses one may experience with emotion. You know, like when you fall in love and your pupils dilate and your heart races a little and your palms might get sweaty, or when you're afraid of something and your pupils dilate and your heart races a little and your palms get sweaty, or embarrassed. How about when you're embarrassed? We've all been embarrassed, right? You say something dumb in front of some really smart people, kind of like I'm doing right now. And what happens? Your pupils dilate and your heart races a little and your palms get sweaty. To be fair, there's a bunch of other things that we do. It's just those are the ones that I remember. And this is why I like to leave the science to the grownups in the room here on the show. But my point, listeners, which I do have one, is that in discussing what physically happens when we experience emotion, there is a space we've only broached ever so slightly in this particular area of conversation, that is. And that, of course, is right here. Right. It's a podcast. For those listening, I just pointed at my head because I'm referring to the little gross ball of fats, proteins, carbohydrates, and salts that we call the brain. Much like the deepest depths of our ocean and the outer reaches of space remain a mystery, so too does much of exactly what is going on, and more importantly, how things operate up there in our brain. But, you know, for all the stuff that we simply don't know yet, here's the cool thing. There's a ton of stuff that we do know. In fact, a fun way to think of it is technically, we know more about the brain now than we ever have throughout the entirety of human existence. Thanks to folks like today's guest, intelligent, dedicated, hardworking people of science who have studied and analyzed the brain, observing it, decoding it for years. Thanks to them, our brains know more about brains than the brains of years past.
I made a bet with Alan that we'd say the word brains no less than a hundred times in this episode. So I'm front loading the intro to make sure we cross that line. I'm beyond thrilled to have today's guest here with us because we get to ask some crazy questions like exactly how does our brain behave when we're scared or entertained or when we dream? Do we have emotions flood the entire system or is there a section of our brain dedicated to handling all that? If we figure out how the brain operates, can we reverse engineer that to interpret people's thoughts and bring what's inside out? What are the implications from a healthcare standpoint? What about our other favorite topic on the show, AI? How can it be used to help fill in the gaps as we attempt to better understand and decode our thoughts? What about the other way around? Think of this. If we better understand how our brain works, can we use that to make a better AI? I got a million questions. For the record, I've said brain 13 times, well, 14. Now before we begin, speaking of big brains, 15, I can't do this show without one of the biggest brains I know. I'm of course talking about my friend and co-host, the great Dr. Alan Cowan is here. Alan, welcome back once again. How are you doing? Sir, are you doing all right? I'm doing okay. Thanks, Matt. I'm excited. Are you excited for today's guest? This is so cool. I'm so excited. Wow. All right. Let's not waste any more time. Let's get him right into the show. Alan is a professor in the Graduate School of Informatics at the University of Kyoto in Japan, as well as the head of the Department of Neuroinformatics at the ATR Computational Neuroscience Laboratories, also in Kyoto, Japan. You may recall reading about him and the team he led back in 2012 when they garnered international attention after announcing they used functional neural imaging to scan the brains of people as they slept, enabling them to decode the visual content of their dreams. A truly fascinating body of work. I'm so excited. Please welcome to the show, Yuki Yasu, Kamitani is here. Yuki, thank you so much for making time and being here with us today. How are you, sir? Yeah, I'm feeling good. Now it's morning in Japan, so thank you for inviting me here. It's my great pleasure. The pleasure is all ours. We are so-
I'm so excited to have you, and I cannot express my appreciation enough joining us from the other side of the world here over in Japan. It's so great to have you here. Thank you. All right. I asked a bunch of questions in my introduction there. I want to get to all of them. We have plenty of time. We will, but before we do, Yuki, I always love to give our listeners a little bit of background and context. It's so much amazing work that you've done. Was this always the area of study you were most interested in? Did you have a fascination with neuroscience your whole life, or was there something that inspired you and it said to you, this is the area I must study. This is what I must explore. Tell us how you ended up where you are. Okay. Yeah. So I've been interested in the relation between our perception and the mind, and early in my career, I was studying visual illusions. So visual illusions are interesting because it shows the discrepancy between what's physically there and what you actually experience. So maybe the gap may be filled by looking at the brain activity. So I was interested in how subjective experience is encoded in brain activity. And so people study brain as it is, and how brain or neurons respond to different kinds of stimuli or some tasks, but it's hard to interpret, right? And each individual have different brain and neurons, and they're connected differently. And those organizations are created by chance, based on their experience in their lifetime. So rather than try to characterize individual brain areas or individual neurons, I was more interested in translating brain activity to something like images or voice or sound.
opez, so that way, maybe we can be sure what's going on in the brain to what degree. So yeah, that's been my interest. And dreaming is an interesting phenomenon. I'm not a sleep researcher or dream researcher. I was just interested in dreaming because it's a very extreme example of the discrepancy between what's there and what the experience. So there's no physical input during sleep, but you still experience something very vivid. So that's why I was interested. Amazing. Beautiful. There's a lot in there that we're going to get a little bit deeper into that I'm so curious about. Now, Alan, you worked with Yuki many moons ago, is that right? How did you two cross paths? So I interned over in Yuki's lab when I was in college, and I got to help out in whatever ways I could with the dream decoding study at the time, which was very, very exciting. And then more recently, we got to work together on an emotion decoding study, which because I had kind of become a behavioral scientist, put together these stimulus sets, Yuki found some of my work and the intersection of those two things had never been done. The kinds of studies that Yuki does that are extremely meticulous, that measure brain activity at a very fine grained scale, that enable you to collect a lot of data from individual subjects and do that sort of decoding, very few people can do that. And so I was really excited to work with Yuki when he told me he was using our emotional stimuli to evoke different patterns of brain activity in participants and try to decode that. So that was more recent, there was a six year gap in between those and more. That initial study that you helped him when you were first starting out, was that, I don't Alan, as much as close as we are, I don't know how old you are when you went to school, was that after?
Because I remember reading about the 2012 study when like the first images were released. Was it after that had happened that you had worked with him? Or was that? It was before that, actually. I think it was 2010, I want to say. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I just was looking at the record and I think you started in 2011 or so. 2011. As a graduate student. At that time, yeah, we were working hard to, you know, write up the paper. Maybe. Yeah. So. Wow. So, because as I mentioned, I remember when those images first came out and that, that was, there was a whole lot of attention around. That was a big deal. So Alan, you were, you were right at the ground level. You were there for those, were you among some of the first people to see the images before they were published and to see? Because one of the questions I wanted to ask Yuki was that feeling the first time you successfully generated those images and were able to see it. And we'll get to him in a second, but Alan, where were you? So I got to see it when they had collected the data from people who are sleeping and they woke them up every 10 minutes or so, basically in so-called hypnagogic sleep for like hours and hours and hours, like eight hours. And then they had the participants report what they had been dreaming about. And so at the time, what we tried to do was decode what people reported dreaming about. So specific topics of the dream. So not necessarily what they were seeing visually. And so when I got to the lab, they had already been pretty successful in this. I tried out a few different approaches. They were interesting. We didn't end up publishing it, but it was still really, really fun and really cool. And Yuki, yeah, just to sort of close this circle here. When I saw those images, I think of, I feel the similar way whenever I see an image from like a panorama from the Mars rover, I can't believe that it's real and that we're doing this and we've done this. So I can only imagine what was that like for you the first time you saw success? We've done it. I can see an image that was generated based on information from another human being's brain. What was that like? Yeah, I'll show you.
Maybe you're talking about reconstruction of some visual image, but that's kind of separate from dream study. So dream study's output is basically some semantic category at that time, in 2013 science paper. So although recently we are trying to make an image from a sleeping brain. And so, yeah, and at the same time, we had a separate project of visual image reconstruction, and that was first published in 2008. And it's like, you know, very crude, you know, black and white signboard like reconstruction. So, yeah, and so yeah, it's really exciting to see, you know, the first, you know, successful, you know, reconstruction or decoding. And, but, you know, science is, you know, it's just, you know, science is hard, you know, so if you get something, you know, very exciting, it turns out to be some noise or artifact or something. So we are always very careful. Oh, I'm sorry, I didn't mean to cut you off. Did you? I just wanted to ask about the fuzziness of the images. So, yeah, actually, yeah, so we have to make sure whether that's real, right? So it's not just some artifact. And so we use machine learning. So, you know, in machine learning, we have to be very careful that, you know, that the test, you know, data test results are not included in any process of machine learning, right? Otherwise, you know, my computer just memorizing, you know, something, you know, something to be output. So, yeah, so, yeah, there's excitement, but, you know, we have to be very careful. So, you know, it's more something, you know, cumulative, you know.
I'm sure too, you've got to, this is true of science in general, before you bring your results public, you want to double, triple, quadruple check that you've, you've achieved what you believe you've achieved. You don't want to bring it to the public and then have them go, well, no, I don't believe you. This isn't, but especially in it with what you're tackling here, the idea of being able to, at the risk of oversimplifying it, look into a person's mind, right? Like to, to, to do that. So I'm sure you had to be very careful and very thorough and double and check everything. Were you nervous when the time came to tell the world that this is the progress you've made? Was that a scary moment to say, all right, well, we've been doing this in our lab and now we have to let everyone know. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Maybe. Yeah. How it's accepted. Yeah. It's kind of scary. A little bit. Yeah. Yeah. But also exciting, I'm sure too. Very exciting. Yeah. Yeah. And since, you know, it's, our results are, you know, easy to understand, you know, to the public at some level, right? So, so there are a lot of misunderstanding, you know, yeah. Some media describes, you know, or is there something beyond what we have actually achieved? Yeah. So let's, let's tackle one of those misunderstandings that I think I might've had and that I was very curious about. And I thought, who better to ask? When I first, whenever I see the images and some other ones that I'm thinking of that may not be from that specific study, but I've seen also where subjects are shown letters of the alphabet. And then you can see the kind of fuzzy, like plain as day, it's an A, it's a B, it's, you can tell the characters, but they're still a little fuzzy. They're a little, they're, they're not perfect. And one of the things, if you can't tell, I'm not a scientist, one of the things I was very curious about is, is the fuzziness a product of what we're capable of capturing? Will that in time become clearer and more crystal clear, or is the fuzziness because that's.
That's how our brains are processing it. When I think of my memory of a dream, it's not photographic. It's a little fuzzy. It's a little surreal. So I was just wondering the origin of the fidelity of the images. Is that the limitation of the science or what we see? Okay. Yeah. So yeah, it's certainly the case that our technology is premature and which is causing the fuzziness and improving the brain measurement technique and algorithm may help make it better. But even if it's, you know, those technologies are advanced, maybe we will still get some fuzzy things, maybe something, you know, encoded in the brain. So, you know, our brain has some internal model of the world. So that's what we experience, but that's not the exact copy of the world. So it's rendered by some experience, memory, or some emotion or whatever. So yeah, so that's actually what I'm interested in. So, you know, brain is not just having the copy of the world. So how it's rendered and actually in our recent study, so we asked the subject to pay attention to an image and the image consists of two overlapping images and depending on which image the subject is paying attention to, the reconstructed image drastically changes. So that's a kind of demonstration of what's, you know, decoding of our internal world, you know, rather than physical stimuli. You mentioned in there, God, it's so exciting. You mentioned emotions and how we can color the rendering. And I wanted, this is a podcast about emotions. I've got a billion dream questions. We'll come back to those, but let's go.
I'm going to walk you down this alley for a little bit and how Alan, feel free to jump in some of the ways in which emotions can color that rendering and what we do know about the influence emotions have on how we render things and see things in our minds. So, I mean, emotions affect, I think what Yuki was referencing as a kind of a spatial attention. Emotions affect your attention. Okay. Emotions affect, obviously, your expressions and the behaviors that you imagine taking in your decisions and they color your perceptions and kind of a more basic way. So, emotions are these kind of global states. And so, if you're not seeing clues to what emotion somebody is experiencing in many different regions of the brain, you're doing something wrong, right? Because emotions affect so many different processes, vision, audition, decision making, physiological states and so forth. So, in many cases, emotion is an artifact. It's something you actually want to kind of regress out, get rid of from, for example, a perception study, right? I mean, to some extent, in the same way that attention differences across subjects are, but it's better if you can model it. What is, you mentioned, you look for signs of a certain emotion. What is physically happening in our brain when we experience emotion? Is there, it sounds like there's observable, like a physical performance that we measure and that we can see within the brain. What does that look like? What is that? So, that's the question that we were trying to ask. And the way that people had approached this problem before is they had basically picked a few different stimuli, one or two or three per emotion and they posited, well, there's six emotions. Let's see if we can distinguish these six emotions by essentially modeling which image somebody was looking at or which video, but there's so many different things. Let's scare them and see what happens. Let's make them laugh and see what happens. Is that kind of it?
Show them something scary and then observe? Is that what we're trying to do? Essentially, that's the intuition. But the problem is that the things that they showed participants differ in a litany of ways besides the fact that they evoke different emotions. And so, you look across many different studies that used those early techniques and you see very inconsistent results. And some of those inconsistencies have been interpreted by people who occupy kind of the psychological constructivist camp that emotions are learned representations and not something that you're born with. Some of those studies have been interpreted as fact that as showing that emotions don't actually involve any consistency in brain activity. That the brain is just kind of, yeah, each emotion corresponds to potentially many different patterns that wouldn't be consistent across subjects or even necessarily across different instances of somebody experiencing an emotion. That was the claim. So, what we decided to do, what Yuki decided to do independently, actually, was take that approach and instead of just showing one or two stimuli per emotion, show as many stimuli as possible so that you can actually try to separate out what kinds of patterns of brain activity are evoked by the emotions somebody's experiencing in response to a stimuli versus the perception of specific visual properties in the stimulus and semantic properties. Are there people in it? Are there animals? And so, we actually, with enough data, we can start to model that. And so, that's what we did. That's what Yuki's lab is really good at. And we have all this data on all these videos, what's in the video, what we can model the visual components of the video. And we found that once you do that, once you take care of all of the noise and the consistencies, you find much more consistent representations of emotion that are not restricted to a few different emotions, that actually correspond to a really wide range of different emotions over a dozen, at least. And we tested 26.
And the patterns of activity that correspond to the different emotions are consistent across different people, remarkably consistent. And they're more consistent than you could explain if you're trying to use kind of a low dimensional theory of emotion. For example, the psychological constructivist perspective is that things like valence of positive or negative, something is an arousal, how calm or excited it makes you are actually the core components of emotion and other things are sort of made up by the brain, constructed by the brain in a way that's learned and not innate at all. But in fact, what we found was that there's less consistency across participants and how people represent or how different kinds of levels of valence, for example, are represented in different brain regions or the same brain regions. There's less consistency in that than there is for specific emotions, which is pretty remarkable. And it sort of makes sense as like disgusting things evoke more similar patterns to other disgusting things than they do to things that are scary. You know, it makes sense intuitively, but this is actually very contrary to the constructivist perspective. Man, that is fascinating. And it's so funny, too, because it's like you said, intuitively, there are certain things that we've sort of accepted as universal reactions that disgust me being one that there are things that we are universally reviled that we all agree is disgusting. And so you can kind of tack on to that and use that as almost like your control. I feel like my next question, it might be too soon for us to answer this, but let's take a swing here. You know, is there a difference having observed and gone and done all this work? Do we know is there a difference between how our brains handle emotions in our waking state versus when we're asleep? Or is it all the same? You know, what do we know about emotions awake versus asleep? Yeah, that's a difficult question.
And actually, yeah, emotion in sleep or dreaming, having studied by, you know, a report after awakening, you know, so, and there's a study showing that majority of dream reports are emotionally negative. So, interesting. Maybe 60% or 70% or so, you know, so, yeah, yeah, so that makes sense to me, you know, so yeah, I don't seem really joyful, you know, you know, doing this. So yeah, and so this, this theory, you know, try to link that to some healing process of the mind or something like that. Yeah. But it's, it's a very limited, you know, so, you know, reports of, you know, dream experience, emotional experiences in dreaming is very limited, and it's hard to collect data. So yeah, it's our future task, but the emotion is a very major part of dreaming. So yeah, we are very interested in that. But so far, we've been working on some, you know, early stage dreaming. So which is, which occurs just after sleep onset. So those, you know, early sleep do not generally have, you know, remarkable emotional changes. So, you know, REM sleep is famous for dreaming. But to measure REM sleep, we have to wait at least one hour or more to get across REM dream. So yeah, that makes it difficult to study REM. But in REM dreams, it said that the more enriched emotional content. So yeah, we're really interested in that. But it's been difficult to study. My question regarding REM sleep, because I've read that that's where you can have a deeper emotional connection. It sounds like I'm way too early to the party. I was going to ask why, why? And it sounds
It sounds like you're trying to figure that out. Why are we more prone to deeper emotional dreams in the REM state? Is it because we're more vulnerable? Is it because we're deeper into whatever that state is? It's interesting because I know that you were, I had read that, that basically REM takes a little bit longer to get to, so it's more challenging. We're focusing on those earlier stages, which is really interesting. But do you have any theories of what's waiting for us over there? Why REM is where the higher, that's heightened emotionally and stuff like that? What are some ideas as to why that could be? Actually, in the first, you know, the relation between REM, non-REM versus, you know, dreaming or not, it's rather independent. More independent than previously thought. So actually, in early theories of, you know, dreaming and brain, so dreaming occurs exclusively in REM periods. But that's not true. So it's just a matter of, you know, degree or frequency. So, you know, the fact is that when you awaken a person during REM sleep, you are more likely to get dream reports as compared to non-REM period. So even in non-REM period, we get a lot of dream reports. So, yeah, the previous theories, you know, strongly, you know, asserting that REM is dreaming is exclusively, you know, appears in REM periods is wrong. But still, REM is like, if you look at the brain activity during REM period, it looks like a wake state. It's very active. So I think it's natural to have a variety of, you know, experience occurs, including emotion during REM. Yeah. Here's a question for you as we talk about emotions.
emotions during sleep and how those can feel and how those are similar and all these different things. How do emotions affect your dream state going into it? In other words, how important was it that when you had yourself when you were doing your studies to make sure that the people you were observing weren't nervous or scared or frightened going into the sleep state? Does that factor in at all how our emotional state prior to dreaming? Is that important? Or is it once we're unconscious, it's a clean slate? We start from scratch. Yeah, actually, I haven't carefully looked at those comparisons. But yeah, that's, that's interesting. So and actually, in our brain scan experiment, it's, you know, sleeping in the scanner is kind of challenge. I would imagine it's scary. Yeah. Yeah. So dream contents. Actually, we study in a first on ourselves, you know, and my students, yeah, going to scanner and sleep. And so yeah, the dream contents are likely about how to set up experiments, you know, how to analyze, you know, the dream about, you know, analyzing his own data. Or, yeah, one dream report says that I was, I was just talking to, I know, Professor Kamitani. I want to quit this project. So, yeah, but it's, you know, you have the experience of being a subject in brain scans. Once you get used to it. Right. Yeah, it becomes rather difficult to keep awake. So yeah, you know, even if you are asked to perform some task, you know, you tend to fall asleep. Yeah. Yeah. So yeah, that really changed. You know, I think the mental set towards sleeping in the scanner may change over time. Mm hmm. That makes sense. I'm going to.
I'm going to ask permission here to ask a potentially very silly question. Alan, since this is technically... Is that all right? Can I... As opposed to all the other questions you ask. Thank you. Thank you. That was good. That was good. Okay. So here we go. Potentially a very silly question. But my whole life, I've been told since I was a child, that dietary habits and food that we can consume or ingest before we go to bed could potentially... If you eat a heavy meal, you're going to have bad dreams. If you don't eat that, it's going to give you nightmares. Now, again, I apologize if this is in no way related to anything you've studied, but I figured you guys have studied dreams. You've studied people dreaming. So naturally you've looked at every possible way that your data could be skewed. So I was wondering, do you have any thoughts? Is there any truth at all to the old wives' tale that if you eat a large meal or what you consume prior to sleeping can influence your brain activity and your dreams? Is there any truth to that? Yeah. I don't know any particular piece of work, but I think it's possible. I like that. Yeah. So maybe you are in a stomach, the state of stomach or some... It's kind of an interception. So our sense of some internal state, which is tightly linked to our emotional experience in daily life. And when you're full, you're in sleep, maybe that affects your emotion and it's reflected in the dream content. So, yeah, that's possible. It's a solid maybe. I'll take it. Yeah. Actually, at the early stage of dream study, we really wanted to control dream contents. That makes it very easy to make sure whether our decoding is correct.
So, but for instance, we had a subject to play video game, Tetris, for three hours. Sign me up. How do I get involved? I would love to do that. Yes, please. Yeah, actually, there is a previous study doing that. And, you know, that playing video game can cause, you know, you know, video, you know, like, you know, dreams, you know, more frequently. And we kind of replicated, but the frequency is very low, right? Only, like 15% of time, you know, the subject see, you know, dreaming about playing games. So that's not enough. And so yeah, we tried various things, but we gave up, you know, dream content. So and then we let the subject to dream anything. Yeah. Yeah. And the cost of that, we have to make a decoder, which covers a lot of things in daily life. So that is a challenging part. Where does one begin that process when because that is very challenging, you have to make, you have to cast such a wide net, you have to look for everything now. So where do you begin? Do you start with a list of the most common dreams? Yeah, exactly. So yeah, actually, we had some dream report, you know, data set of dream reports. So we picked some most frequently dreamed objects. Yeah, but it turns out that it's it's not specific to dreams. Yeah. Oh, yeah. And it's, it was kind of, you know, just a general list of daily objects, like automobile in the chair, or house or street. And yeah, it's and we chose about 20 very general object categories, and the correct images and showed those images while subjects awake. And
And that's how we created the decoder, which is used to analyze sleeping. You would then take that from when they were awake, you take that data and go, okay, when their brain does a similar thing while they're sleeping, they're imagining that thing again. So very cool. Here's a question. Let's go. Just a fun one. Do either of you keep a dream journal? Do either of you keep logs of your dreams? Yuki, do you write down your dreams or no? You keep your work separate. Yeah, I used to, yeah, yeah, but that makes the memory of dreaming very vivid. And sometime I was confused, you know, reality and dreaming and which, yeah, so I don't generally recommend. Well, it's funny because one of the things that when we talk about dreaming and I think of all the things I'm curious about, there's, you know, lucid dreaming is telling you a lucid dream. But for our audiences, my general understanding of what I've read is it's basically a hyper awareness of being in a dream state. And pop culture has extrapolated that concept to show showing people that are like Neo and the Matrix. And when they become aware they're in a dream, they can manifest anything in their dream and they have all this fun stuff. And so that's a very appealing, cool idea. And a lot of people will say, well, start a dream journal. The more you journal, the more in tune you'll be with that part of your, with that activity in your brain. And so I was just curious as someone who is trying to understand and decode dreams, if you had a journal yourself and it sounds like you gave it a go, but you do not recommend. Yeah, actually, yeah. Lucid dreaming is a very interesting topic. And it's, when I first heard of that, it's kind of a dubious thing, but it's real. And there's recent good scientific studies and they're trying, you know, some are trying to induce lucid dreaming by stimulating, you know, prefrontal cortex. So what's different in lucid dreaming?
The main difference from ordinary dreaming is that the prefrontal cortex in the brain area for some more high-level executive functions is active during sleep, which is usually inactive during sleep. We could use lucid dreaming for our study, but lucid dreaming itself is a very special state. Since we want to study more general dreaming experience, so far we haven't looked at lucid dreaming, but it's potentially. Yes, on the board, it's an option. Alan, you ever have a lucid dream? You ever do that? I was into it in high school. I used to wake up at two in the morning, three in the morning. There's a technique you can actually wake yourself up and then kind of follow yourself back to sleep. And you find yourself in a dream, and you sort of know you're in a dream. And at that point, you can actually make things happen just by thinking about them, which is really cool. So, I was really into that for a little while in high school, and I had some lucid dreams. I mean, it's pretty hard to force it, but I probably had dozens. Dozens? Yeah. You've had, Alan Cowan has had dozens of lucid dreams. Am I hearing that properly? Yeah. I can't remember why. I think it was because I saw The Matrix or it might've been Waking Life, and both of them kind of reference lucid dreams. Yeah. Both of those will do it. I was going to ask, I just wanted to make sure I heard that because my follow-up was going to be, what's the funnest, like craziest thing you did in your dream once you were in control? I want to know what Alan left to his own devices. High school Alan can do anything. What's he do? Do you remember? So, first few lucid dreams that I had, I would say probably the first two thirds of them, I just tried to fly. And that worked sometimes. The problem is when you're in there, so I was able to fly pretty consistently, but like when you're in the air, it's hard to keep yourself asleep because it's scary. Then you wake up.
It feels like you're falling. So that was tough, but then I think the coolest ones that I had were kind of at the end of that whole fad that I was into, um, where I would just, instead of doing anything in the dream, I would just meditate in the dream. So your go-to move, you found yourself, you have captured the fire from Mount Olympus, that is the ability to control your entire reality and you opt to do nothing, you opt to meditate, to see. So here's the thing about dreaming and you do something kind of crazy, you wake up pretty fast because something happens and then, you know, it's hard to keep yourself not to kind of around, like, you know, the two, like wake woken up to like, wake, actually wake up. Um, and then, uh, if you meditate in the dream, you can actually keep yourself in that state for a longer period of time. And it results in like a very disembodied feeling. And so you can be kind of teleporting, traveling in some kind of way, not like. Did you keep a journal? Did you keep a journal back then? I never actually, well, I did try once, but I never, I never really stuck to it. Okay. Cause I was going to say, if that journal exists, I will, I will bid on it at all. Right. If it exists, I don't know where it is. Uh, well, this is, this is a podcast in iTunes. That means on the internet, which means we could ask the people of the world to look for Alan's dream. Please don't. People in the world. I rescind my ask, please do not look for Alan. Uh, but you're, I mean, you, you're going to have to stop me from pitching you a whole new podcast where we just go dozens of lucid dreams. That is fast. Um, it's amazing. Thank you for that. Well, thank you both of you for sharing those personal experiences. I love that. And I appreciate that very much. Um, let's, let's talk, Alan, you know, you mentioned the other day. Uh, as we're talking about lucid dreaming and different types of dreams and, and, and, and different things that can happen when we're dreaming, you said something the other day that I'd never heard before that I remembered and I wrote down, which was this idea, and I can't remember.
If it is a theory or if it is something we have proven, I feel like we have touched on it. When we are in REM sleep and we see someone's eyes moving around and darting back and forth, there is this thought that that is us, our brain, looking around inside, in our dream world. That really was interesting to me. Because I always love, you know, as we talk about what is inside our minds, it is this, when we are asleep, it is this surreal intangible thing that is super real, but we can't quite touch it and grasp it. When that kind of bridges into the physical realm, it is very exciting to me. It is also a little terrifying. All the work you have done, one, Alan, did I remember that incorrectly? Is that a theory or is that something we kind of know? Elaborate on that a little bit for me, because I was so into that idea. What do we know about that? I read a study, and I don't know how much I trust it, but I read a study that they had people who could lucid dream, that they followed their eye movements, and the people were instructed, I think, in a double-blind way or single-blind, I guess, it couldn't be double-blind. But basically, like, you have to move your eyes either left and right or up and down when you're in your dream or something like that, to that effect. And they verified that during sleep, which, you know, they can measure when somebody's asleep based on their EEG signal, that the people's eyes were actually moving in that way. Yuki might know about that. Yeah. Actually, yeah. Just to add some details, so that study was basically about smooth eye movement. So when you have something, a finger in front of you and continuously moving, you can continuously track the position of the finger. But it's hard when you close your eyes and imagine something moving smoothly. So, you know, eye movements tend to get jaggy, you know. But in lucid dreaming, you know, they just imagine a finger in front of them and smoothly moving, and they can make a very smooth eye movement. So that shows, that indicates that lucid dreaming is not like imaging.
So it's more like our perception or our daily awake experience. So that's interesting. And then as for rapid eye movement, the rapid eye movement is not smooth. It's jumping. But the theory is saying that it's tracking something in the scene. And actually, we are very interested in that theory. And we try to prove or disprove that by making a picture while subjects are having rapid eye movement. So just before rightward eye movement, if there's something salient in the image to the right, maybe that's kind of evidence that rapid eye movement is for following. But another theory is that it's just random. Yeah, so... Yeah, yeah. Has, as we talk about these different facets of the sleep experience, for lack of a better term here, has the work either of you have engaged in and done offered like a new perspective or insights on phenomena such as sleepwalking or sleep talking or sleep paralysis? Has anything changed how you perceive those or what you think about those types of things? Have you dug into any of that? I know that's not necessarily what we're focusing on or what studies I've read about have focused on, but it's right next door. I imagine you have thoughts on it or you've read something interesting about it. So I just wanted to kind of talk about all the sleep stuff and get it all in there. Any interesting ideas or thoughts influenced by your work, sleepwalking, sleep talking, stuff like that? Yeah, actually sleepwalking and actually, yeah, so some people having sleep disorder walks around, move around. And depending on whether it's in REM period or a non-REM period, it's called differently.
So and during REM, if some movement occurs, it's called REM sleep behavior disorder, or something like that. So, and there are only a few studies, but they report that, you know, the person who shows some, you know, sleepwalking kind of behavior, reports dream experience consistent with that behavior. And actually, that's been the almost only, you know, evidence that, you know, dreaming is associated with some, you know, brain activity during sleep. So actually, dream reports are basically some recall of some memory, right? So and there's no certain way to make sure that dreaming actually occurs during sleep. Some philosophers said that dreaming is just invented after awakening, right? So by the subject, right? So logically, it's, it's, it's been hard to refute that possibility. But from our study, it became more uncertain that, you know, dreaming, dreaming occurs during sleep, because you know, brain activity during sleep can predict dream reports, right? So it's, maybe it's obvious for most people, but there's no solid proof for that. Yeah. Alan, did you want to add anything? Because we're coming in to the homestretch. No, you're good. I see you shaking your head. Okay, very good. Very good. I can never tell if you're nodding in agreement, or if you've got something, and I never want to steamroll. I agree. So yeah, the homestretch, which anyone listens to the show, you know what I love to do, I always love to look ahead and talk about the future and, and kind of talk about what we look forward to and what we're excited about. And, you know, Yuki,
When I was with a simpler tech like Wi-Fi, I get it. Wi-Fi is going to get faster. Uh, electric cars are going to get more efficient. I understand that, but in, in your field and in what I was trying to figure out what the next steps are going to be, obviously we'd like for the images that we're able to, uh, get to be less fuzzy, to be clearer, but, but what are some of the goals looking, looking down the line? Uh, is it to reach a point where, uh, we can pull full sentences like text, we can understand text, is it, is it not photo, but video from people's brain? What, what are the steps? What are the mile markers as we look ahead? What's the next big thing that you're hoping to achieve? And then what's the thing after that, that you hope that you've set up the next generation to get to? I just, cause it's such an abstract area. I couldn't figure out what the, what the linear path is. Okay. Yeah. So yeah, in my lab, there's several different projects are going on, such as, you know, decoding of sound in the brain or, and, uh, also, yeah, emotion is one of the topics and, uh, and, uh, actually I'm collaborating with neurosurgeons, uh, for building a brain machine interfaces. So we put the electrodes in patient's brain and, uh, have them to control some, something like mouse cursor or simple robots. So that's actually, you know, being studied intensely and Elon masks, you know, new neural link is working, uh, for building some brain machine interfaces. And, uh, the goal is like, uh, you know, type text, you know, faster or something like that. Right. So, and I think that that's initial step, you know, important initial step, but, uh, I'm more interested in, in, you know, as I said, in the brain has, you know, low model of the world. So I'm interested in externalizing that. Yeah. So, and, uh, you know, in science fictions, you know, people, you know, like matrix or inception, they.
They share the world in mind, so I think that the direction, the first step is just moving robot hands by your brain, but the direction will be sharing your internal world with other people. So towards that, we're working on 3D reconstruction, showing some 2D images, we can now reconstruct 3D model object, although, you know, the access is very poor, but we are beginning to see. So and we want to connect that to Metaverse, so and share with other people. So that's kind of the direction we're interested in. Forgive me if I'm misunderstanding the specifics of what we're capable of and what it can lead to. But you mentioned how you can show a subject, show somebody something and then you can recreate it. And you're saying if they've seen it, you can then recreate it 3D wise. Are we, is there, will there ever be, or are we working towards a time where I could, in theory, I don't need to be shown the object. We're doing that now so we can figure out how all the wiring works. But once we figure it out, is it one day? Will it one day be possible to browse through memories the same way I browse through photos on a phone? And I don't mean in five years, just like, is that even in the realm of possibility that if we figured all this out, that I have my long term memories from when I was a kid that I can, I can still hold on to stick with me forever, for whatever reason, is it one day possible? Yeah. That's a big, big challenge. And someone seriously pursuing, but our approach is based on brain activity. So it may be a fire in your brain firing or some metabolic changes picked up by some. But the memory is generally thought to be encoded by some substance or some synaptic connections and those things, which is kind of structure or protein or something.
It's not some potential or something. But using some fancy imaging technique, for small regions, you can visualize a change of synaptic structures. And the big challenge is whether we can reconstruct some memory from those structures. But I don't know, it's very challenging, but it's very interesting. Another thing we should consider is that whether memory is... Now, the dominant standard theory of memory in the brain is that there are basically synaptic connections. But some people don't agree with that. There is something else, something beyond synaptic connections. We still don't know what can explain the memory content. So what to read out. But yeah, potentially it's an interesting challenge. It's just one of those things as we talk about it, and anytime I read about the neuroscience of the work that you're doing, for everything we figure out, it feels very similar to our exploration of the cosmos. For as far as we get, and as much as we learn, there is still just so much that we are yet to figure out and will one day figure out. It's daunting, but inspiring and exciting and all those fun things all at once. It's really cool. Alan, before I wrap things up and jump into the outro here, just for you, looking ahead, how has some of the work that you've gotten to do, some of the work you're watching from afar, watching you can do, how does that change and excite you for what's going on in your world and over at Hume? And what are you looking forward to, bud? Yeah, I mean, there's the methods, stats side, and I kind of got into that through neuroscience, but now it all kind of comes back together when you think about the future of AI.
And brain augmentation and what Elon Musk is at least trying to do with Neuralink, I mean, a lot of that work is kind of inspired by Yuki's lab and other labs that followed what Yuki's lab had done kind of shortly thereafter in the years after there were a lot of, there were several other labs that tried to do kind of similar things. And it was very inspiring to a lot of people. And I think that's probably part of the inspiration for what Neuralink is trying to do is that you want to create an interface that allows you to keep up with the AI. Like basically, if AI is going to be so intelligent someday that it kind of puts us all out of work, are we just going to allow it to kind of cater our lives and be kind of passive recipients of what the AI does? Are we trying to augment our intelligence so that we can be more actively participatory in that future economy that's created by AI? And I think it's a cool idea. I don't know. I mean, it's a little bit scary, obviously, to think about brain augmentation. But I think if you can imagine without trying to think through all the implications, just like imagine you could, when you're trying to pull something from memory, you're interacting with a machine that can identify what kinds of memories you're trying to pull up from memory and then show you visually the image that corresponds to those memories, or not even memories, imagination and all that. That kind of interface could kind of accelerate every aspect of intelligence. We kind of have a version of that now, don't we? Where it's like we have all these images, these generative images, where it's like, that's kind of what led to my earlier question of what's the next step? Is it a stream of text? Because it's like, right now, there's no shortage of places that you can go type in whatever stream of consciousness you can think of. And boom, there's a photorealistic image generated. So it's like, well, okay, what if it's not a matter of decoding the image data? What if we just got to decode the words? And then you have an AI that generates the image in accordance with what you're trying. And so you're kind of tapping into that, right? Where it's like, maybe we don't know how to get to the memories, but we've created an AI that knows.
This is what those memories should look like. And so as we try to tap into them, it presents it to us. Very interesting, a little scary, but super cool. Absolutely. I love it. And then I could do a whole episode of just one of the things I get super excited about. And you mentioned this Yuki of controlling robot hands or moving a mouse cursor. And just, you know, I think a lot of people, their gut reaction is to put the tinfoil hat on and say, Oh, no, they're coming for our brains. Nothing is safe. Sure, we've got to have regulations. We've got to be careful and look out for what happens. But also, I love what can this mean for the people who are differently abled, people that don't have the, somebody stuck in a coma, all these different things. The relief that we are on the cusp of the solutions you could provide. It's just, it's too amazing to not explore. We've got to figure it out. And so in that regard, thank you for all the work that you're doing and the teams you've assembled and the stuff you figured out so far. And thank you in advance for the stuff you're yet to figure out. It's so cool. And I appreciate it. I appreciate that. Not only do I appreciate the hard work, I appreciate the time you made. So let's go ahead and wrap things up. It pains me to say it, but I got to say goodbye. So grateful, Yuki. I said at the beginning, I'll say it again. It means a lot to me and the team here that you made some time and hung out with us today. I hope you had fun with us and enjoyed yourself. Yeah, I really enjoyed. Yeah. Thank you very much. It warms my heart. I'm happy to hear that. Thank you. Alan, you two are also a very busy man. I don't want to understate that. So it's not lost on me that you made time to hang out here today. So thanks, Alan. It's good to see you. Always a lot of fun. I'm glad to hear it. And speaking of my little list of people I appreciate, next up, most important of all, the listeners and watchers, however you're consuming it. The point is, you're here too. And because of that, our show exists. So keep showing up, sharing it with your friends and giving us good ratings on iTunes and all that fun stuff. And we'll do our best to keep rounding up geniuses for simulating little chats like these. And hey, if you have a question, any question, we'd love to hear it. Send it our way. You can email us at thefeelingslab.com.
Feelings Lab at Hume dot AI, that's T-H-E-F-E-E-L-I-N-G-S-L-A-B, the at symbol, H-U-M-E dot A-I. And one day, I swear, we're going to pull a bunch of them again and answer them on the show and I'm going to make Alan do it. It's going to be a lot of fun. That's going to do it for now, everybody. Farewell from all of us at the Feelings Lab. I'm Matt Forte. Thanks again, everyone. And please stay safe out there.
