Spooky, huh? You know, I actually chose this opening in honor of today's guest. Apparently, this is one of their least favorite places in the world. You'll find out why later in the episode. Speaking of which, this is the last one for the month of October, and with only a few days to go before Halloween, we felt like there was only one emotion we could tackle. It's perfect, really. Everyone experiences it, but in their own way. It brings people together and makes them run away screaming. It's something that we'll gladly pay money to engage with, but we're also forced sometimes to confront in our everyday lives. It's gross. It's gory. It's hilarious. It's timeless. It's shocking. It's got a lot going on. Hello, world. What is up? Welcome to the Feelings Lab. I'm your host, Matt Forte. And on today's episode, we're going to talk about horror. I try to start each one of these with a personal anecdote or a memory, something to make a tangible connection to the day's topic before we dive into the nuanced nooks and crannies. And in the lead up to this one, I was surprised not by the amount of memories I was able to recall and kind of swim around in.
But more so by the variety amongst them. I had like funny memories, inconsequential ones, painful ones, distant fuzzy memories, visceral, real as the day they happened moments as well. I mean, you name it, it was up there. And one of my earliest actually trick-or-treating memories was the absolute terror I felt as the world's most screen accurate Michael Myers menacingly followed my dad and I for several blocks. It was 1991. And I remember this because I was a Terminator. And I'll never forget the feeling as I became profoundly aware of how useless my toy gun was. And I wasn't going to get to enjoy any of my candy. Evidently it was like a neighbor or something. He was trying to say hi to my dad. I didn't know that at the time, but that doesn't change anything. The check was already cashed. I was terrified. Now that's up here forever. And so I think of that moment coupled with the countless experiences impact movie theaters gasping in unison with the crowd, late night sleepovers chanting Bloody Mary and Candyman into darkened suburban bathroom mirrors. And on the flip side of that coin, literally any moment from the last 18 months worth of news or in a more personal note, standing in front of my grandmother's house, my childhood home and watching it give way to a terrible fire. All of that, all of those somehow reside under the same umbrella. And even more fascinating still is all of that is just my personal experience. You know, different people, different cultures all have their own unique relationship with horror. Some people rejoice in it. Today, I want to open Pandora's box. I want to read from the forbidden scrolls and traverse every inch of this.
I want to explore it all. A scary proposition, I know. They say it's dangerous to go alone, but thankfully I don't have to, because I'm dragging my three friends and co-hosts along with me, as well as one very special guest. I say it every week, I mean it every time. There is no show without Dr. Alan Cowan, Daniel Credit Cobb, and Dr. Dacher Keltner, and good news everyone, they're all here. And as for that guest, he's a supremely talented actor, comedian, writer, producer, and musician. You've seen him on Portlandia, Saturday Night Live, Documentary Now, and literally dozens of other things I know you love. He's the co-creator, writer, and executive producer and co-star of the fantastic HBO series Los Spookys, self-proclaimed lover of not only the horror genre, but of people who love horror. Please welcome to the show, the great Fred Armisen is here. Fred, my goodness, thank you so much for doing this. How are you, sir? I'm well, and thank you so much for such a nice introduction. Oh, well, thank you for doing all those really cool things for me to say. It's super great to have you, we're thrilled. Danielle, Dacher, Alan, of course, how are the three smartest people I know doing today? Doing great. Doing good, and I wonder if this secretly should be a moment where we have Fred be your horror therapist for everything you just talked about in the intro. I gave him a lot to unpack, let's ease him into the group chat. But I do, I am going to throw to Fred in a second, but before we dive dive in, in my head, and Dacher, keep me honest here, under my umbrella, there are two things.
But what else will we learn about each other in this podcast? Well, first of all, I'm going to start with a few slightly smaller umbrellas. One, like the art of horror and manufactured horror that we create and be it TV films, theme parks, et cetera. And then over here under this umbrella, there's like the naturally occurring events and just existing in general, et cetera. And so I want to start more on the cultural umbrella side and we'll make our way over to the other one. But even before that, am I crazy for breaking things up that way? I think that delineation is one of the most profound delineations in human culture, which is evolution gave us all these emotions that help us connect to people and connect to the environment. Emotions like awe and embarrassment and love and desire. And then culture is this magical, powerful force, a couple hundred thousand years old. And it's taking the structure and form of these emotions and philosophers like Suzanne Langer have written about this and then transforming them into aesthetic experiences, right? So the sounds of emotion become music and Alan's done work on that. The images of our emotional landscape in real life become what we paint, you know, Goya painting horrific images. And that's the dynamic interplay between who we are in our evolutionary history and then how we create things. And what I love is art gives us this moment of understanding, right? Of like terror and horror and beauty and love.
injustice and so forth. So it's you're wise to delineate the aesthetic from the quote real, or every day as a starting point. You're very kind to say I'm wise. Thank you for that. That's all I took out of all of that. That's I, well, I do. That's that's actually great. I want to jump in. So Fred, I said I was going to throw to you first. Before we get deep in the weeds, I want to go kind of back in time with you for a second. I think it was around when Losa Spooky season one came out. I'd read something where you mentioned when you were younger, you lived in Brazil as a kid, a little kid and the soap operas and, and death being a big deal and, and remarking on the celebration of it at all. And I'm curious if that was your earliest exposure to horror, full stop, or if that was the first time you'd seen it kind of recontextualized in a more positive and celebrated way like that. Both so a little bit before that, as a kid, I would see it was probably on TV, some of the, the Dracula movies from England, the hammer movies. So something in that I already spoke to me, there was something about those, that type of vampire, because at this point, it was color. Yeah, but it was like faded color. And something about it really spoke to me. And it was, it didn't feel scary to me. It's something that I just wanted to, I love the aesthetic, I wanted to be a part of it, there's something to me, even with the fangs and everything, that
was somehow also kind of a celebration, just like those soap operas in Brazil, where, because even though those were very, there was like a morbidity to those soap operas, it was still, I don't know, Brazil, like, there's a lot of celebration and ceremony. So even in that it never felt like horrifying. And by the way, those two umbrellas you were talking about. I was just thinking that I have a question. And that is that it does the word horror has that already? Does that already the word itself lean into that the umbrella of entertainment, and like the fun part of it, only in that, like, I don't think I ever hear anyone talk about real life events as horrible or horrifying. I usually hear terror more with that. But I'm just asking, I just feel like the word horror is kind of like is already becoming kind of a sort of lovable work. Absolutely. I would love to get smart people's thoughts on that. Let's go. I mean, this is a podcast about emotion. And so we want to talk about horror as an emotion here. And there's that whole space of empathic pain, disgust, or sort of gradient from horror to fear, fear to anxiety. And then there's movies about, you know, the horror emotion. I think there's movies that are more centered on the fear and anxiety. And those are really called thrillers. And the way we kind of want to
I situate horror in sort of a narrative of the human experiences. When you're running away from the big tiger, that's fear. When the tiger eats your friend, that's horror. I think it has something to do with our knowledge of our mortality, of all of the contemplation that goes on, of our kind of higher level awareness of what's happening there, and the way that it invokes almost a spiritual element. It's invoked culturally in a kind of a spiritual way of magic and horror in the afterlife, and thinking about what happens to souls after you die. And the strangeness of ceasing to exist is sort of what's being contemplated often. So I think that's the distinction we can make between the emotion of horror and fear. One of the things I was really curious about, Alan, specifically, is as you're mapping out human emotion, and you guys are creating these super detailed, nuanced maps, I was curious, thinking like, okay, well, in Brazil, they celebrate horror. And I know that in Chinese culture, they don't even have a haunted mansion in their Disneyland, because they have a totally different relationship with ghosts. So how do you, as a scientist who's trying to map the universal human experience, account for those different perceptions and ways people sort of activate or don't activate when exposed to horror? How do you guys kind of figure out what works for humans? Yeah, I mean...
So there's two questions there. One is, do people experience horror? And the other is, do we like it? I think there's some cultures where, for some reason, we like it. And in East Asian cultures, we generally, people generally don't like high arousal emotions as much, generally. Although there is a discussion of the afterlife and spirits and all of that that people sort of revel in, especially, for example, Japan and Shintoism, all kinds of cultures in East Asia. But yeah, generally speaking, I would say we talk about the expressions of the emotions that you feel and experience, the experiences that evoke them. People generally feel, report feeling horror as distinct from fear, when they see mutilated bodies, when they see ghosts, when they see monsters, and that's across cultures. And the expression is a little bit different. There's, for fear, an expression that's sort of quick. It's almost a gasp. There's a gasp that's like negative surprise. And then there's, for fear, it's kind of a, ah, it's kind of outward. But then for horror, it's, I'm not going to do it, but it's like the prolonged blood-curdling scream that you wouldn't do if you were on the run from a tiger, because you wouldn't want to tire yourself out. And I think people recognize that across cultures as being horror. Until you said blood-curdling scream, I was going to do that annoying thing where I was going to go, do it, but then, no.
You made the right call. So that's the map, if you look at it kind of in terms of what's going on with the actual emotions themselves. But Fred, I'm so curious for you. There, of course, is a creative map to horror too, the kind of rules or recipes for horror. And when I think of like the design of horror, I'm like, okay, in The Shining, you learn that things in twins, that like the twins, two of something is bad, you know, or like Scatman and Crothers, it's like, there's always the one who knows or like, in Lost and Spooky, it's like Andres has this hidden story that like is revealed over time. And even like two of my favorite horror films are like psychological thrillers. It's like The Omen where you become afraid of Rottweilers or Rosemary Baby where it's like anything yellow is evil. And so I'm so curious, like your experience as a creative person, playing with these spaces of our feelings, like how does that work for you? Is there kind of a recipe there? It's like, um, the first thing is that it's, it seems like a universal language, like all the things you described, also brought like smiles to all our faces, or it's like, it's so it's, it has a weird mix with comedy. Yeah, even though in the movie theater, especially with The Omen, like we would be, we would be scared. It really does bring happiness to whatever most of us. And I like
I like it as shorthand. I do like all some of that imagery, all of that stuff that makes it work for audiences everywhere. So it's almost like if it was music, it's like a distorted power cord, you know, like that one big cord that you just know everyone loves like, hey, it's loud, but we all love this. And that's kind of like where that comes from. It's like it's so it really is unifying. There is some undercurrent of evolutionarily speaking, it exists to bring us together in some way. And so I'm very, very much wondering, how does that work with horror? Is this from the very beginning? Has it been I'm in danger and other people come to me because I'm like, what are the roots? Take me back, Decker, to the very beginning. Why do we do this? Why do we scare ourselves? Well, you know, and it makes me think about an experience my brother and I had in a wax museum in Madrid, Spain, when we were 15 and 16.
We love going to wax museums, you know, because they're kind of weird, freaky. Yeah, and we go in and it's all torture. It's like wax representations of beheadings and drawing and quartering. And it was just horrifying. But if you to Fred's point, like if you watch the Spaniards in there, they're leaning into each other. Their arms are around each other. They're kissing each other. They're cheek to cheek. And they're like, oh, you know. And and that's the idea of of artistic representations of any emotion as they allow us to be together. What happens scientifically is our brains start to synchronize. We lean in. We're closer to people. And it gives us a chance to contemplate. Right. And for me to Fred's earlier point about where is there still horror out in the world that's real and maybe Fred's observation that horror now means enjoying movies is a good thing, ironically. But where for me, it was Abu Ghraib, right? It was seeing those photos. And I got to interview this artist, Susan Krile, who did these incredible drawings of Abu Ghraib. And and it was this moment of reflecting on what we do to each other, what we can do to each other's bodies as of real art, real experience in art. So it it I think the representation of horror is one of the first moments.
evolutionary history. It's just to figure out like, how do we stop tearing up each other's bodies? Yeah. Is that what you're after Fred? Yeah, I mean, yes, I do. There is like that, that positive way of looking at it. On a smaller scale. I think that if something happens in public, right, if you're alone, say you're on a train or something and something shocking happens, it doesn't have to be horrible, but something shocking. The way that you know how like, we all kind of look at each other. It's kind of bonding. If something crazy happens, it's people sort of look at each other like the look being whoa, or you know, can you believe this is happening? If there's something in there that I think, so even with the example you gave, there is something to like checking in with someone at work and being like, can you believe this? It is a little bit of like it separates you from that. I think of that contagion. I'm sorry, go ahead. I think what's so interesting about that contagion moment, too. And even like, Fred, I'd never thought of it as like joy, the joy that comes from horror. It's like there is this kind of real, like uplifting. And I think the belonging thing, one of the things I remember the most that of course, is like a cultural meme, but is like everybody in the theater being like, don't go in there, you know?
Just reflecting back on this, I was like, what movies have really scared the shit out of me? And I remember living in New York the summer that Blair Witch came out, going to the theater. And because that was one of the first times where they really tricked us with the viral thing, we all thought it was real until the actors started showing up on TV promoting the film. And then we were like, wait, I thought you were dead. And what was funny was seeing it, being so freaked out, everyone in the theater screaming, like it's a New York audience. So it was like, rah. And then I have never been so happy to exit into Times Square. I was like, we all made it. It's okay. And all these humans are welcome and the lights are welcome. We're not in the woods anymore. And I just, I love that as a high relief moment of a bizarre way to belong. It's like equally as beautiful as any other way. Yeah, agreed. And I love also the highlighting of that, the exit from the theater. That's the thing. That's the big difference for me, not just the social aspect, but when I'm in a theater watching something scary, I'm safe. I'm surrounded by a hundred people. In the old world, I'm safe, surrounded by a hundred people. And that in itself is not terrifying. That's comforting. We're all seeing this. And when it's done, I get to leave through that door. But when I watch it at home and then it's like, I sit there with my wife and I'm like, I gotta go to the bathroom. You go first. None of us want to move. We don't feel safe in our own house at that point. Cause we can't leave this thing. Because the call is coming from inside the house, dude. Exactly. That's why, that's what it is. That's why we don't have landlines anymore.
That's why but yeah, I just it's such an interesting sort of, you know, yin and yang just the same exact film, but two completely different experiences that you can have. Yeah. Is there something to be said for just like from an evolutionary advantage of sort of desensitizing ourselves through art so that we're better prepared to outrun said lion when it starts chasing us? Is is that is there any science that points towards that? Well, I think there's this general story about play behavior, where, you know, from a young age, you literally fight each other. And then at a certain point, you laugh. And you know that you're not serious, you're not trying to kill each other. And that's training for fighting. That's training practice for actual conflict. And horror is probably pretty similar. There's training for how you respond in a situation where everybody is in danger. And children like to tell each other stories. I think probably across cultures. And in any case, across cultures, there's fairy tales that are horrifying. They're told to children, they get them ready for this experience of what do you do when something is actually a real thing? I actually read this article, and I looked it up before this, because I knew we were talking about this. But like, nerd alert, I was super excited. Because I remember there was this article that said that people who watch horror films were more resilient, like there was a scientific study done, it was published in a journal. And what was great is it was like this fully legitimate professional academic thing.
And today we are joined by Dr. Colton Scrivener, who is an amazing scientist. And what was lovely is it was at a University of Chicago, a guy named Colton Scrivener. But what he basically said is he was like, if you watch specifically the genres of alien invasion, zombie or apocalyptic films, these are what they call prepper films. And they're basically like, they prepare you to be able to cope with almost like exposure therapy style to fans are more resilient. And I was like, Oh, my God. So that therapy line, I didn't realize it, but it's accurate. The example of Blair Witch, I would say is definitely real life preparation. I'm not a fan of being out in nature. Sometimes nature is scary to me. So that forest, that forest that they were in that they were lost there, that was really effective, because it was that videotape quality. And that kind of worked on me of like, if I was out at dusk in a forest that I didn't know, so in real life, I do, who knows how much it really affected me. But I do kind of think like, let me be careful to not be lost in the forest at dusk. I'll turn down any invitations, you know. We're going to invite you to the camp out. I just love the idea. You guys know my standing rule. Nope, it's at 530 and it's in the middle of the forest. I'm not going that is on the border.
I wish I knew. I'm terrified of heights. Me too. Yeah. And I think with forests is I just don't feel prepared where I think some people probably would be prepared to understand what direction is north or how to survive this loss of control. I also think forests actually look huge and intimidating. They don't seem like friendly to people. They're a little bit like, are you sure you're prepared because we go for miles, we go all the way back there forever. Yeah. We don't have like a little boardwalk. It goes into streams. This is actually, this right here, this is the best part, but once you get in, it gets way worse. So if this is already far. Oh my gosh. That's so funny. I, yeah, I don't know that I have like, um, uh, I, I definitely, I agree with, uh, with heights. I have that same fear, uh, forest in general. I would say forest at night. Yes. Once it becomes more vast.
And once I can't really see how vast it is, similar to like getting lost and like just staring into the stars. I just like, you know, the, I have like an existential crisis and I just become immediately aware of how tiny I am and how this thing is prepared to eat me. It's kind of like how I feel sometimes. To go a little bit back, Danielle, it's amazing that you mentioned that article, Dacker sent me a different article, but there's overlap here that I'm really excited to bring up. He sent me an article today about horror restaurants that are popping. I was in the New York Times and this particular restaurant happened to be vegan. And there was a quote I pulled from the article because I loved it. It was, there's this sense that horror fans lack empathy because how else could they enjoy horror? He says, but a lot of horror fans are so empathetic that they don't want to eat animals, which I mean, that's up for debate that a lot of horror fans are vegan, but I still love the idea that horror fans are more empathic than people that don't get it or don't watch. And I was wondering, you know, are there studies that can show it now that we know there's a study that shows that they're more prepared, are there studies that zero in on their empathy levels and show how empathic a horror fan is or fans of anything for that matter? There's a, there's a little bit of work on fiction, you know, reading fiction and some of it is horrifying as promotes empathy. There's a really interesting study that should make Fred happy, which is when they release blockbusters that are horrifying.
Violence actually drops throughout the United States because everybody's in the theater leaning into each other, hugging each other, sort of forming these bonds. But I think the broader thesis is yet to be tested. And we should ask Fred about his thinking about this, like how in the world could seeing horror make you more empathetic to your fellow human beings? Well, I would sooner just point to like when you think of horror fans, no offense, I'll put myself as one of them. When you think of goths and horror fans, when you just think they're the most gentle people. I don't want to make it such a big generalization. But when you just think of just how they are, how they speak, they're just gentle. And, you know, I think somewhere in I don't know if that's the answer, but somewhere in there, I think that goes for, I think even, I actually think the same of like, people who are really into heavy metal, like metalheads, who are into really dark metal, actually, the ones who I've met and bands who I've met are, it's a real quiet sort of sense. They're sensitive. I see them as very sensitive. I have never encountered a metal band who was just like trying to be tough backstage and like, what are you doing here? It's always like, I think they're soft spoken and sensitive.
It's a it's like, again, it's a generalization. But that's, that's how I see them. And horrifying. That's why it's called. You don't have to wait. Yeah, that's why it's there's this great scientific study of where these guys took mosh pits, they looked at metalhead concerts. And there are two forms of humanity at metalhead concerts. There's the mosh pit where everybody's engaging in this chaos, but then around the mosh pit is a wall of humans that are kind of all moving together, protecting the people in the mosh pit. It's amazing. It's like, you think it's chaos, and it's yet it's civility. So I remember I was at a show in Providence, Rhode Island. I think it was seven dust was the band. And at that same show, there was a large intimidating biker presence, right. And so you already you walk in with this bias of like, oh, these tall, brooding, bald dudes with leather vests that are not my friends. I don't know. I want them to be I want to be on their side, whatever the argument is, I don't want to be against them. And so you go in there, and you're very intimidated. And I remember the pit, and we're all going through and my friend, Kent, who at the time was like 90 pounds soaking wet, like super rail thin kid, and he had like, I forget what, but he's in the pit, he's kind of getting lost. And he goes down. And this dude just swoops in, and one arm picks him right up, like dusts him off. Good. All right, buddy. And like
It was a big life lesson of like, all right, the whole book by the cover thing was like these guys, though they may have been in Tim, they were all there to have the same party we were there to have. And they, everybody had each other's back. If someone went down, the whole group got them back up and it was a team effort to make sure they were okay. You got water, you're good, you're hydrated. All right, back in the pit, let's go. And it was just like such a lesson. And also it was a great show. But yeah, just to speak to that. I'm totally having my mind blown right now because I feel like what I thought used to be a Venn diagram of goth, metal, veganism, or I'm like this Venn diagram is a circle. That's beautiful. And I think what's fascinating is like, part of me, the aha that was going off as everyone was just talking is like, it takes a lot of sensitivity and courage to be someone who makes friends with the shadows, the things that go bump in the night, the things that live inside of ourselves, and the ability to create community around that the call into that. I'm like, Oh, I missed one of my social callings. This is like, I'm really I'm like struck by this truly beautiful. I was afraid you were about to say you were surprised that I was a seven dust fan. So that was a relief to hear that observation, which was much nicer. But you're right. I also like it seems like horror fans that they're sort of the vulnerability is that they're also acknowledging their own fear or like being friends with what they're scared of. It's a really vulnerable.
It's a vulnerable thing to admit, you know, even to, you know, to step into the room with monsters. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And to like shine the light in such a way that they're not actually monsters, which is part of what you were saying earlier, that, that joy, that if the light shined and we're all together, it's like, it's all okay. It's it will all be okay. Yeah. Yeah. Um, and it's made all the more interesting that when you go like way back and you look at some of the earliest, so I started, um, watching, uh, rewatching rather the, the like the universal classics. Cause they're all on, uh, HBO max. I don't know why I said that. They're not paying us. Uh, but they're there. Hey, everyone, I'll make sure to check out HBO max. I don't know. I said, well, that's where they are. You know what? If you're listening and you want to watch the universal classics, they're, they're up there. So that's where they are. Go find them. I saved you the Google search. So anyway, we were, we were watching specifically, uh, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, specifically, uh, we were right at the very beginning, uh, the, the bell Lugosi, 1931, uh, Dracula and the introduction of Dracula in that film, just the way he comes out of the coffin and like, it's incredibly deliberate and it's pace and like every bone in his finger wraps around the top of that coffin before he moved. And it's so slow, but unsettling. And I was just thinking about the contrast between that, uh, and sort of the jump scares and intense edits of more modern horror and just how unsettling and slow and atmospheric
They use credentially developed artificial intelligence to create the world's first ever neurons and a process which also electricity and brain development at the DONUT, so around 8 billion neurons were built using the software thatsigh Soft4Human developed. As one of the main pillars of yük Donkey running, supercomputer science, hey, yeehaw, this is working. The next biggest math discussed this semester is how cognitive Nazis and free that we can move the universe of manipulating neuron brains remotely. Physicoms in the scientific field should see this as a hint at an even more fascinating discovery. So, what do you think about that needle shifting in that direction? Why that's happened? Anyone? Because I obviously have no idea. We need your help, Fred. Yeah, Fred, what do you think about the way, because as a little bit. Why Dracula early? And what does it mean now? Why do you think it's progressed the way it has? And why do you think it's evolved the way it has over time? Sam, I'm trying to think about it for a second, because I don't know that it doesn't work anymore. Like this. But if done poorly, it doesn't work anymore. I mean, I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't have an exact example, but I think there are some slow shots of people coming out of coffins that might still be working. I mean, I'm sure some zombie movies are a little more sped up and there's like a lot more speed happening. But I think I have a feeling that there's still some scariness to the original movie. I go to this other place where I start thinking, like, how did they know it was scary? It was such early days of horror that... Wow.
I don't know how they took the temperature of what audiences were like, but that's amazing that they figured out that moodiness. I love that because you're right, watching it now in 2021 and forgetting a large part of what the world was like in 1931, they couldn't test it. They had no other basis. There was no one telling them, this is how you got to shoot it this way. So that is awesome. Let's open that up a little bit. What do you guys think, Dak or Al and Danielle, why do you think they knew in 1931 that Bela Lugosi taking five minutes to get out of the box was scary? I think the slow buildup still happens sometimes. The scene from Get Out, where the guy's running toward him and it's just a slow, coming closer and closer and closer. I think that really freaks you out somehow. I'm not sure why. I think the move toward jump scares may actually have something to do with people's being so desensitized to horror movies at this point, that they start to go toward the cheap thrills a little bit more. But I don't think that's true of the more intellectual horror movies, or for example, Losis Spookies, which I enjoyed watching. I think that's no jump scares in there, totally different take on horror. It is still horror, but with the comedic elements. And that's much deeper to me. Thank you for the compliment. Why does horror, and Danielle, this is something you and I were talking about.
I'm going to ask you a question that came up a couple of days ago is why does horror pair so well with comedy with a love story with you can tell so many stories against the backdrop of a horror story as well. Why do we think they pair as well as they do and work so well together? Are you asking me? I like to pose open questions. And the beauty is this, this isn't even live. So if you take 10 minutes to think about it, I'll just cut out the silence. It's not that big a deal. But anyway, No, no, you should leave the silence in as if something like from a horror movie happened. Love it. Love it. I mean, I also Alan A. Dacher Well, how do you Fred, like, how do you think about that in your, your own artistic career, right? You have years on Saturday Night Live, comedy, absurdity, satire, those spookies or just a different, different process? Or what do you think? It's more that like, it was a, like a satisfied feeling. So there's a sketch that we used to do on Portlandia where we played goths. We played these goths who had a hard time going, going to the beach, they didn't know what to wear at the beach. But the fun part of it is that so the pose the goths would do would be like this, like, doing that. I don't know why it worked. But it really made us so happy. There's really no joke to it. There's no, there's no punchline.
I don't want to get into it. But in that moment, for us, horror and comedy just worked out. And then we do meet up with someone who was from a band called the Misfits. So even the music part was, you know, worked out. And then as far as music goes, you know, there's some terrifying album covers that we all love and that are really sort of scary. So that's worked out. It works with music very, very well. Yeah, it does feel like there's this like, you know, what I'm hearing today, too, is like, there's this primal piece that's like deep in our wiring. And then there's this like social construct piece that kind of changes based on what's going on. And I feel like I noticed the kind of comedy thriller thing, especially when like scary movie came out and all these things that were like, Hey, guess what, here's the blueprint for this. And but you're still gonna be scared, you're still gonna freak, you're still gonna scream. And I love that kind of play. But I think what's interesting, too, is I was like, thinking about the films, I was the most scared by or the most, like, and scared and kind of deeper ways to is like, what's interesting is the way to like, horror is almost this, like, this cultural commentary or literacy. It's like you think I'll mention get out, that's like a cultural commentary on systems of oppression. And then I remember when Saw came out, and was just like that, that was with me for days, I was like, but you know, what was weird is that was supposed to be this like allegory.
I think it's like something that's something that it's both it's I think, both reasons. So I think sometimes a little bit of comedy in a horror movie, it just actually lightens things up a little bit. So it's like a roller coaster. So you can just have a moment so that it's not pure horror all the time, you just need something to kind of, I guess, relax you a little bit, you know, so that the scare is more effective. But then there probably is like an element to like writers trying to show that time is moving on. So there might be an element of like, hey, this is you know, whatever year 2021 or whatever year it's going to be, where they are trying to redefine what a horror movie is. So there'll probably be some other new comedy move with dialogue or something that, you know, something like scary movie or, or get out also had like elements of comedy to it. So I think that'll just, it's, it's like, yeah, it's just like.
a new way to throw people off balance. And I know we don't want to get I'm assuming we don't want to get too topical, or maybe we do. But I do feel like squid game is like a new horror genre, even though you could call it something else. I do feel like that's a new kind of fear. Yeah. 100%. Yeah. You know, but I don't. Now that now that I've just said it, I'm like, Oh, God, am I? Now I'm on a podcast. Like, it's Fred Omerson proclaims game is the new horror. It's like me saying the same thing about Game of Thrones. It's struck me just that but that movie was just so I'm sorry, that series. Yeah, definitely had horror elements. I mean, to be fair, I was gonna walk you up to that at some point, because I was gonna ask what you've been watching recently, and what's had what's been the most effective in that genre, or in even the sub genres of which there are many. And so so squid game is one thing that's been very effective for you lately. You know, have you found yourself? Do you constantly revisit older stuff? Are you always mixing old and new and seeing the the black and white and going back and forth and watching that needle bounce back and forth? And yeah, and sometimes I think I wonder if we all do this, like, you kind of like tiptoe away
I really found that Midsommar that came out I guess two years ago about the Swedish heart, I love that one so much. And that's about like a step ahead in heart. Whenever they find some new nationality where it comes from, or that's so much of that is in the daytime. So I like when that so that's something that really had a huge effect on me. I think going back to 2008, I am one of my favorite horror movies was something called strangers. Oh, yeah, trio who break into this house, and it's, that's still truly scary to me. But what about you guys? I'm curious about this, this question of like, usually with or actually, usually I don't know what I'm talking about. I feel like there's this, you sort of like create boundaries around things like, oh, horror is this genre involves like these emotions, fear and disgust or whatever. And what I find interesting is I'm thinking about this and listening is it's almost like anything can be horror if it messes with you, and what is comfortable. And so like, I heard KK Barrett talk about her, it's a love story, and it's a horror
This podcast is produced by Hume AI, a research lab and technology company. This podcast is produced by Hume AI, a research lab and technology company. This podcast is produced by Hume AI, a research lab and technology company.
Yes, I think we should do that. Before we get out of here, we'll, we'll, we'll draft one up together and then we'll, we'll find a way to get it to them. I think they, they deserve to know. I don't want to go for it. Yeah, please. I love that all those movies and books sort of an existential high level discomfort, as opposed to just, you know, there's like the cringe and pathic pain. You see somebody like getting their eye poked out, which is, which is fun in moderation, but the existential themes and midsummer of like these truly horrifying relationships in some ways that you find out the true nature of over time and get out. It really about slavery and about dark history of things we don't want to talk about. So when, when we can play with those ideas, I think it becomes a deep, deep. Horror or musical. Oh, because Keegan's character is horrified that he's about to be in a musical and he does, he wants to know part of it. So let's, let's put that in the, for a moment. It's a momentary horror genre. Like as the episodes go, it lightens up. That's going to make it really hard to find when you want to watch it. If we keep moving it back and forth, but I do agree. It is only momentary. Yeah. And then it, yeah. And then it shifts. Yeah. I don't want to pivot us too far away from this, but we are.
We are coming into the homestretch and a mainstay of this podcast has somehow become me asking Alan for examples of parallels of the emotion we've discussed in the animal kingdom. We've had some incredible revelations thus far involving capuchin monkeys and some other fantastic stories, but I worry that this one has the potential to get really sad really fast. I defer to your expertise, Alan, what can you tell us about horror as it's experienced in the animal kingdom and as it's been observed by scientists and humans? So this is another tough one. I think we've discussed like startles, jump scares, obviously, animals have those. Animals have empathic pain and cringe responses. Animals have disgust. They want to stay away from prodding things. That's very clear that animals have all those things. Two aspects. One, do animals enjoy horror like we do? And I think that where our enjoyment of horror may come from is the fact that play has evolved to be high level and evolved to be stories, basically, and animals don't really have stories or narrative to play with. And so I don't think that animals probably enjoy horror. Do animals have like the high level existential dread that is unique to horror or non empathic pain or fear or disgust? And I think that that sort of requires an awareness.
of your own mortality of yourself as a body that is temporary. And maybe whales have some of that you see them carrying, you know, there's a famous orca that carried around its dead infant for 17 days. Elephants mourn their dead. I was gonna say, I think of elephants mourning their dead. I've seen primates in general, like, you know, mourning their dead and things of that nature. So I assume there's something there that maybe we aren't able to tap into it and say definitively, that's the thing. But yeah, but as people that experience those emotions, like, you know, that they go part and parcel together. There's got to be some element of that in there. Yeah, there's also sadness in there. So I don't know where we are in our umbrella map where veganism is the handle of said umbrella. But I'm curious if you need that level of remove for horror to operate the way that it does. Because like in the animal kingdom, if somebody gets eaten by a tiger, they really got eaten by a tiger. It's not you watching. So scientifically, I'm curious if that is a piece of it. Yeah, I mean, I think you do. And that's, you know, in that's a complicated cognitive shift, right? To go from this is reality to, I'm one step removed. And I'm thinking about the loss of an individual's existence. And I don't, I'm with Alan, I'm not sure that's out there in the non human world. Jane Goodall observed, it's kind of
It's kind of this startling observation. She has a new book out on hope, by the way, but chimpanzees would go out in these kind of squads and kill other tribal members of chimpanzees, other chimpanzees and really bludgeon them. And that would be where we would ask, do they have a sense of the horror of their act? And I don't, I don't think so. But it's an interesting question. Yeah. Yeah. No, thank you for asking that. Cause I was, that's something I wrote down too, is like when you, when I'm talking about my earlier delineation is like, I wonder how much of like removing that safety is part of it. Right. Like, like you said that in the animal world, they have no concept. I mean, I was optimistic. We had the capuchin monkeys purchasing. Okay. Real quick for the regular listeners. I promise this is the last time I bring up the capuchin monkey experiment, but Fred to catch you up briefly, I've taken to summarizing this each time. So Alan explained to us an experiment in which capuchin monkeys were given a form of currency. It was imbued with a value. And then those monkeys were observed to exchange the currency for a monkey pornography food. And then last week it was revealed photos of the alpha male. Everyone has to go to YouTube just for this moment. Hopefully now you understand a little more of why I can't stop bringing this up, but I was optimistic that.
Perhaps we'd end up back at that capuchin monkey story where they've exchanged money if they're buying pictures of the alpha male, perhaps they're buying something that resembles a form of horror for them. But no, that's not the case. They haven't done that. Or have they? Wait, so did they in fact exchange money for any of those things? Alan? So you give capuchins currency that they can trade for fruit, and then all of a sudden you realize that they're using it for prostitution, basically. Wow. Like paying for sex, and then the monkey that paid for sex immediately goes and exchanges that coin for fruit. Wow. It's knowledge of what's happening. Yeah, they haven't done do capuchins pay for horror? I think that'd be tough from an ethics standpoint to justify, but... Fair enough. It's definitely an interesting question. Yeah, I don't know. I think Dacker's example of chimps mutilating each other is really interesting in some ways, because it goes beyond they just kill each other, actually setting some sort of example that's meant to horrify the other chimps and the other chimps. So that could be evidence there. It's like I said, this got real, real fast. I was hoping for more monkey porn stories. I was going to say, are we going to circle back to Ned Stark's head on this bike? Like, oh my, somebody save us from the creative world, please. But I think they've interviewed some of those chimps, and a lot of those rivalries go back.
I'm sorry to say it, but that's all the time we have for today. I gotta blow out the old candle in this here jack-o-lantern, but I want to thank my co-hosts, Danielle, Dakar, and Alan for another great chat. And on behalf of all of us here, I'd like to extend a ridiculous amount of gratitude towards our guest, Mr. Fred Armisen for taking time out of his busy schedule to join us here today. Thank you so much, Fred. Thanks for having me. This was so much fun. I love talking to all of you. So thank you. That means so much. Thank you. Before we get out of here, I know there's always new episodes of Big Mouth coming. We talked about Schmigadoon. I've read you were recently announced as Cranky Kong in the upcoming Super Mario movie. You've got so much going on. What should people keep an eye on? Anything else you want to plug before we call it on this one here? Anything else going on for you? I just want to plug sushi as much as I can as a type of food. It's just great. Great. Got it. Sushi. So if I'm keeping track, it's HBO Max, Sushi. And Dakar, you mentioned Jane Goodall's new book.
That's what we're plugging today. Those are the things. Oh, this is a selfish question. Any updates on Losa Spooky season two? Can you tell us anything? Yes, we're shooting. We're slated to shoot. We had to stop shooting because of the pandemic and we shoot in Santiago, Chile. And we're starting back up in January of shooting, finishing the season in January of 2022. Oh, that's so exciting. I'm so happy to hear that. That's where it stands now. Who knows? Of course, the pandemic will take us, but so far that's the schedule. Well, I'm going to hold you to those dates. It's set in stone. Fred Armisen, everybody. Thank you so much. Last but certainly not least, thank you to you, our listeners. If you enjoyed this episode and it's your first, we've got some amazing stuff up there about desire and all that. I highly recommend you check those out. If this is not your first time with us, welcome back. Do us a favor, tell a friend, write a nice review. If you've got a little bit of time, imagine it's October 31st and we're all at your doorstep, pillowcases in hand, throw a five-star rating in there. Why don't you be the full candy bar house? Do it. All right. If you have any questions you'd like answered, even if it's just like, I don't know, like about the weather, it doesn't cost any money. Email us at thefeelingslabathume.ai. I'll put that right down here so you can see that. Actually, you know what? In honor of Halloween, I'm going to change that. Instead of thefeelingslabathume.ai, it's thefeelingslabathume.ai. That's T-H-E-F-E-E-L-I-N-G S-L-A-B-A-T-H-U-M-E.AI. Go ahead and email us.
Farewell for now from all of us here at the Feelings Lab. I'm Matt Forte. Thanks again. Have a safe and spooky Halloween, everyone. We'll see you next time.
