Hey, hello world. What is up? Welcome back to the Feelings Lab. I'm your host Matt Forte, and on today's episode, we're talking about pain and personalized medicine. As our ongoing exploration of the full spectrum of human emotions continues here at the Feelings Lab, throughout all of our conversations thus far, a particular point has been consistent and, though it may seem obvious, highlighted, no less. It's a simple fact, really. For all our similarities and overlap, no two people experience feelings and emotions the exact same way. And don't get me wrong, we can relate plenty on a bulk of the surface level stuff, that's the whole basis of this podcast, but the infinite nuance that manifests in each of us as we traverse our day-to-day remain wholly unique to ourselves as individuals. But sure, okay, let's say I've gone too far. Maybe we do experience the exact same thing the exact same way. At the very least, you have to grant me that we all have different ways of describing it. Our own language, if you will. Sometimes we lack language entirely and can't explain how we feel at all. Now, if you and I were relating our personal experience of, say, eating an ice cream cone, I might talk about the cold hitting my teeth and the crunching sensation from chewing the sprinkles, while you might pick out the satisfying snap of the outer chocolate shell and smoothness of the vanilla. I apologize, by the way, I missed your softie truck rolled by while I was writing this copy. The point is, we feel different things in different ways. But that's pretty low-stakes stuff, that's just ice cream. Now imagine if you're at the doctor and you are struggling to articulate how your back hurts, or something just feels funny. Or if you're one of the millions of women who know full well how they feel, but have to navigate an ill-equipped system that either ignores or dismisses them. The ability to describe and communicate the extent to what it is you're feeling, specifically the pain you are experiencing, becomes very, very important. So, how do we detect pain in people that can't describe it? Are our physical pain and mental anguish mutually exclusive? Deeply intertwined? Both? Much like the spectrum of emotions, what about the spectrum of pain? The different kinds?
and intensities and flavors, if you will. Understanding our pain, being able to better track it, communicate it, analyze it, it can only lead to better diagnosis and treatment. In other words, actual relief, which if you're someone who has never suffered from chronic pain, mental or physical, one, go buy a lottery ticket because you're incredibly lucky, and two, trust me, relief is a huge deal. And a lot of people have learned to live with the assumption that it just isn't coming. Now, I'm not saying we're gonna solve all the world's pain problems today, though that would be pretty sweet. But there are people out there working incredibly hard to expedite our journey towards a future where people aren't dismissed or misunderstood, but rather each individual can be diagnosed and treated in a specific and effective a way as possible. One such person pushing us forward is on the show today, and I'm thrilled that they're here and made the time to hang out with us. We'll bring them on in just a second. But first, what I'm feeling right now is the opposite of pain, because my good friend and co-host, Dr. Alan Cowan, is here with me once again. Alan, good to see you, sir. How are you doing, bud? Doing good, no pain today. I can't explain it anyway. So far, so good, very good. Fantastic, Alan. All right, well, let's keep rolling, my man. Our guest today is director of the Pain Intervention and Digital Research Program at Brigham and Women's Hospital Faculty at Harvard Medical School. He completed his medical training and psychiatry residency at Yale University, Pain Medicine Fellowship at the University of Washington, and his graduate work at the University of Texas. He has written for the Wall Street Journal, Time, and Scientific American, and his latest book, Reading Our Minds, The Rise of Big Data Psychiatry, is available right now wherever books are sold. Please welcome to the show the great Daniel Barron is here. Dr. Daniel Barron, thank you so much for being with us. My goodness, how are you doing, sir? Doing great, thanks so much for having me. It's a wonderful welcome. Awesome, well, thank you, man. No, thanks so much again. We're just so excited to have you on the show. There's a lot I'm excited to get into and dig into today. I loved your book, by the way, congrats on that. We'll get to that in a little bit, too. But let's start with a simple question, guys. Simple question, but I assume a pretty big answer. Why, why is pain detection so important? So as a pain physician, I'm the person people would go to if they're.
Experiencing pain and you know, as you might guess, it's a pretty, pretty wide range of things that can cause people pain and also pretty wide range of the ways people describe their pain. Yeah. So this is a, this brings a real complexity to my work because if someone's coming to me for treatment of a painful condition, I have to not only be able to define it clearly to communicate about it with the patient, but also I have to define it clearly in order to understand if my treatments are being useful for that patient. And so both in terms of understanding and also in knowing that my treatments are successful, it becomes relevant. For sure. Thank you for that. Alan, what, from your perspective, why do you think it's a, it's super important? Man, I mean, there's so many layers to that. You get into the evolutionary explanation of why people recognize each other's pain, why we have expressions for pain, sound of pain, and that's more of an anger one. You know, you hear it and hearing it is one thing because, you know, you want to know when somebody else is in pain because there's a threat, right? You might want to be running away from it, maybe you want to run to them to try to save them if it's a baby and you're the mother or the father, you want to run to us to help. And so there's so many signals that we have for pain. And then, you know, if you're a soccer player and you want to fake an injury, you can exploit that too. I mean, there's just so many ways that we use pain detection from an interpersonal perspective. And then when it comes to sort of medical diagnosis, it's a whole nother level, right? Because you kind of need objectivity. But most of the tools we rely on in everyday life to sense each other's pain are not objective. They're very subjective and very social, communicative. And so there's this barrier. And at the end of the day, you need to have a firm diagnosis of somebody you probably don't know. I mean, you probably know your patients well, but not as well as you would, you know, a mother and their infant. So you have to really navigate these complexities to be able to make an actionable decision that's going to affect the trajectory of somebody's life. Oh, fantastic. Exactly. Yeah. 
Yeah, actually, can I add something to that? I think the evolutionary origins are fascinating. And then also within an individual, the way that they conceptualize pain themselves can evolve over time, and even within their own social group. And so one of the complexities I have to manage is people come from different, we could just call them socioeconomic backgrounds, each of which has a unique expression of pain, including maybe facial expression, routines that may cause them pain or not. So being able to identify the clinical signal, the actionable clinical signal there is really complicated. Well, that reminds me, and everything you guys said in the past two minutes so far, those are the themes and everything we're going to dig into today. So this is very exciting. But going specifically in this direction, Alan, you and Janet sent over this really cool article, I think it was on undark.org, about how psychologists have theorized that Chinese people experience emotions more physically than other cultures. And it reminded me of the opening of your book, Daniel, where you talk about how you had to go to China, and you had zero knowledge of the language. So all you could do is observe in the waiting room. And in doing so more often than not, you could accurately get a pretty close assessment of the different patients you observe. I know in the book, you were speaking more to the universal language of behavior. But what do we think about, to what extent does one's culture have on one's relationship and experience with pain? So this is actually something I've been thinking about a lot. My research assistant, Melanie Fu, is Chinese in background. And we've talked a lot about the difference in the way people describe pain, like types of words that they may use. And there's a literature, I haven't read this undark article, but there is a literature that describes how in different cultures, people are more likely to describe back pain in different terms. Maybe there are more physical terms in the US is much more common, like, oh, there's pain in my back, whereas in other cultures, it might take on more of a, not really like a supernatural, but more of like a psychological connotation or use different terms to describe it. So there's actually a whole
It's a whole literature within the pain field, trying to develop questionnaires that can then evaluate patients from different cultures, trying to target similar like physiologic concerns, but using different language that may be more identifiable by those people. Wow. Which I think is really interesting. That's not what I was talking about in my intro to my book, but it is a really interesting thread to think about. That's something that Melanie and I have spent a lot of time rolling over in our minds. Wow. Sorry. Maybe I lost the thread that you had originally asked me about. No, it's all right. I just Keanu Reeves and I went, whoa. I got lost in the concept of what you were talking about. But Alan, any thoughts on there before I keep moving forward? Some stuff I want to follow up with. Well, yeah. I mean, whenever you're dealing with language, I think there's so many differences across cultures and sort of how people describe things and the norms with which they describe things. The language for psychological pain gets really mixed up with the language for physical pain in weird ways. But I think pain expressions, nonverbal expressions, facial expressions, and the voice are actually in our research, some of the expressions that are found to be the most universal across cultures. Interesting. And so when you move away from language, interestingly, there seem to be more commonalities in how pain is expressed. I wonder then where it comes into play. If the expression is universal, I wonder what's happening. Something's happening prior to the point of expression, right? I wonder if it influences pain threshold, if it influences how they think of pain. There's a lot going on there that I think would be fun to poke around and dig around inside. Yeah. I mean, the meaning of the expressions is recognized to be the same. The value of appearing strong, appearing weak differs a lot. The value of associating having grit with masculinity varies a lot, although I actually think people overestimate the extent to which there is that. I think a lot of masculine people more readily express pain than people that you would maybe expect not to express pain more readily, if that makes sense. And so expectations are violated.
And I think that's what we've been talking about quite a bit. I think it's a very interesting concept, and I think there's a lot of things that can be added often by that assumption. But yeah, all these cultural norms influence your likelihood of actually expressing something and the intensity with which you exaggerate it. Probably much more likely to exaggerate pain expressions on a soccer field or football field, depending on your culture, versus... Depending on what team. Versus you don't see, even though you see very serious, yeah, no, exactly. So there's sport dependencies that you can see where all the... As we're talking about all these different levels of expression, these different types, it begs the question, I can't help but think of the emotion maps that you guys, Alan and the team at Hume have been doing for our listeners. I mean, I brought this up a million times. It's what Hume does. It's a beautiful thing they've been working on. They plot out graphically in a way that I've never seen prior to these things, the full spectrum of human emotion, right? Where things overlap, how they're all connected and related and so on and so forth. I'm curious, with all the levels of pain, has anyone made a similar map just yet like that? Here's eating a spicy pepper. Here's faking a soccer injury. Here's losing a loved one. Here's breaking an arm. Does that exist yet? Have we mapped the spectrum of pain? Or what do we know about the spectrum of pain? So I haven't seen anybody map actual pain experiences to expressions in real life. And doing that in the lab, obviously, would have its complications. You can't do that to people. But maybe the military is doing that. Yeah, I don't know. They're listening. We'll find out. If this cuts out, we'll know. If this makes it to the audience. We seem good. But there are amazing spectrums of empathic pain versus experience pain that we're mapping out. Where in the recognition of emotion, you can see the differences between empathic pain, which is like kind of the cringe versus the experience of pain. And there's massive overlap there. But we're able to distinguish them. And yet they have commonalities in expression and neural correlates too, where there's like overlapping brain regions that represent both. Like when you see somebody's hand.
I think that's one of the complexities in the field is experimental pain versus lived pain. So if you're laying in a scanner and you know, to Alan's point, you know, one of the things they do is they put your thumb in a vice and they squish your thumb or, you know, they might put some cream on you to burn your skin or make it feel like it's burning. There are even studies where they'll inject something into your, your veins to make you feel very uncomfortable. And so these kind of experimental ways of inducing pain and studying pain in, you know, in the brain are very different, you know, at face value from, you know, the feeling of breaking your femur or, you know, having, you know, long-term low back pain. And so it's actually really hard to study experimentally because the way that you elicit pain in a laboratory is very different from the way someone might experience or think about their own pain in the real world. So yeah, very complex. It's really difficult. You would think you'd be able to decode pain from brain activity, since pain is seemingly like raw feeling, but no, you can't really do it very accurately. So the best thing we have are these kind of survey scales, which Daniel talks about a lot in his book. So yeah, no, it's really tough. Something else that's really interesting is, there's a whole branch of neuroscience devoted to nociception, right? The transduction of painful stimuli, right? So I mentioned the thumb press, right? So if you reach a certain pressure, you'll have some nociceptive signal that's transduced as a result, or you might have like chemicals that burn you. And so those signals are received in the periphery, go up your spinal cord into your brain. And so those are nociceptive signals, but that doesn't mean that you've perceived or experienced pain yet. And so this is a lot of what I do at the interface of psychiatry and pain medicine, right? So being able to parse out what is nociception, like what are the painful signals?
Perhaps from say osteoarthritis or arthritis in your knee, and something from a more essential process like trauma-related or depression-related or anxiety-related that may be amplifying some signal that's coming from the periphery is another confounder that we have to work with. Something that really can't be understood experimentally and kind of separates out that experimental pain from a lived experience again. Wow. Allen, were you about to say something? Yeah. That also reminds me of another way that separated is through that experiment where you put your hands under a desk and then they put a fake hand that looks like it's attached to you on the desk and then they hit it with a hammer. And there's a feeling there that is kind of like a pain feeling, but not that you actually feel and you want to kind of flinch. And so the feeling of pain is actually different things kind of combined together. The central part of it and the nociceptive part, and they have different kind of experiential qualities, I think. Wow. Along the same lines, that's a really cool experiment. So phantom limb pain, right? So this is something that's very well described. And so for whatever reason, if someone has an arm or a foot amputated, they may still perceive pain in that limb that is no longer there. And so obviously they're not receiving nociceptive signals because there's no foot in this case. And so one of the ways that you treat that is through mirror therapy, right? So the opposite of what Allen was just describing, where you show them essentially their same foot, but you split it and make it look like a right foot, even though it's their left foot, right? And you get them to kind of calm down their central nervous system in their brain, the way that they're processing information from that area. I've seen this before and it blew my mind. They were an amputee. They only had their left arm and they sat them at a table with a large mirror and they would flex and unflex their left arm. And the mirror, I mean, the appearance of having their right arm and it actually alleviated some of what they were feeling. It was wild. It blew my mind. It really did. I have the human brain is...
There are other pain syndromes, so complex regional pain syndrome is not exactly, well, it's not at all the same thing as phantom limb syndrome, but a similar treatment, right? So you have mirror therapy where you're trying to retrain the way the nervous system is thinking about and processing information from your periphery. In this case, they have their right foot. However, they have significant pain there, whether a result of a nerve damage or something else happened. And so the central nervous system is just like an overdrive, right? It shouldn't be receiving painful signals to the magnitude that it is. And so this type of mirror therapy has been proven to be pretty helpful for that as well. That's just incredible. And I apologize to the listener that after everything Helen and Daniel say, I go, wow. But this stuff is blowing my mind. It's really cool stuff. It's super cool stuff. Let's go back a little bit before we get too far down this particular rabbit hole, because I'm curious. You know, we were talking about culturally how different people experience pain, the different expressions of pain. How do we detect pain, though, in people who can't describe it well? Talk about your most challenging patients, Daniel, that come to you and they have trouble articulating what they feel or what it is. How do you go about cracking that cookie and figuring out what's going on there? So there are different groups that may struggle expressing what it is that they're sensing. And this is something I've written about and think a lot about clinically. So a lot of the clinical interaction depends on the patient's ability to introspect, meaning to think about what's going on in their life. And then crucially, to be able to describe what they're feeling in words that I can understand, which may be a barrier in and of itself. And so patients who struggle doing that are obviously some children, people with cognitive difficulties, whether at any stage of life, but also at older patients who may be experiencing some cognitive decline, or even patients in the hospital who may not be conscious. And so defining tools that can help us understand what someone is experiencing.
Experiencing and giving us actionable information is really where a lot of people's work is heading, including work in our lab. And so I have a grant in right now at the National Institute of Aging to try to target older patients, try to develop tools that will help us better measure what we're calling functional status in older patients. And one of the things that we're really interested in doing is capturing face and voice data to be able to identify changes in emotional expression that could be related with pain or with mood. And so it's not an easy problem because it assumes that there's some ground truth also. And if what you're doing is you're trying to interpret someone's expression in terms that they don't have themselves, it becomes a very complex problem. Yeah, for sure. I'm reminded, for as far as I can recall, the biggest advancement I saw was when one day in the doctor's office, I noticed the one to 10 emoji scale on the wall that I get to point to. And every time I see that, I'm like, how have we not moved past this yet? How is this? This is the cutting edge. This is what we've got. The only advancement I've seen is the change in style of emojis as the scale remains the same. So you guys are actively building towards, because that's where my, do we have a spectrum of pain chart question comes from is like, I feel like that would help. But of course, as you've said, it's not just having that, but it's how do we overcome that personal biases or account for those rather, and how do we interpret that? And you kind of answered this, but what would the ideal tool look like? What to you would solve all those problems? What's the thing that you guys are, unless you can't tell me, because then you give away the 11 herbs and spices, but the stuff that you're working towards, what's the perfect tool? How do we, how do we fix for this? I don't have a perfect tool yet. That's why I'm still doing research. You know, obviously if there were some ground truth, that would be amazing. Yeah. But unfortunately, what would that be? I would suspect it'd be unique to every individual. And so, you know, the way we experience anything very much depends, you know, not just on our, you know, social context, you know, where we are.
You know, in terms of our socioeconomic status, our location, but also our individual experience, our history with pain itself, whether or not we may be experiencing some sort of mood disorder or trauma, you know, all of those things get filtered into the way the brain processes information and then outputs that perception of pain. Yeah. So it's a, I keep saying that word complicated, but it's kind of complicated, right? Well, I mean, Alan, you mentioned earlier a little bit. Just like the, the social, like the masculine expectations of like, you know, that they're expected to not reveal pain. This was something that I was thinking about just thinking of the cultural perception of pain that like, yes, a real man doesn't know real pain. He doesn't express pain. He keeps it in. And he, and he deals with it quietly. And it's just like, that stuff's so crazy to me because like, we know every individual has a different pain threshold. Some people's wires are crossed so much, they get pleasure from pain. Like there's, there's so much going on up there and yet still this idea of like strong versus weak persists and it leads to, I would expect under-reporting of pain, dangerous neglect, embarrassment, all kinds of stuff. Yeah. And it seems like a pretty big hurdle. Where, how do we get over that? How do we beat that? So, yeah, I mean, I think when it comes to under-reporting of pain in some contexts, there is the ground truth. Like if it's cardiac related and you know, the outcome is this person was having a real cardiac issue and there's, you know, there's some work being done in that area of, you know, thinking about how can we, can we, from people's descriptions of their pain, predict the actual underlying physical condition. And that will, I think, be really helpful in moving forward a kind of literature on quantifying pain expressions and normalizing them for each individual or for contexts. You know, even in the case where it's kind of chronic pain that's not linked to a underlying physical issue that you would treat through surgery or whatnot, you know, there is still a kind of ground truth, I think, that you can start to get at, which is after administering an intervention, is there a reduction in the kinds of.
I'm going to talk about a few of the things that indicate negative quality of life and pain and an increase in sort of indicators of well-being, which I think you would need more data for, right? But, yeah, but I think if you have enough of that data, you can start to see if you're over prescribing medication to certain kinds of people or under prescribing to other kinds of people. And you can actually say for a given patient, what is the likelihood that if you prescribe something, they would actually undergo an increase in their quality of life? And those models would be sort of a way of soft, semi-supervised way of getting at what pain expressions mean for different people. Interesting. Interesting. One of the things that I'm kind of building towards as we talk about the cultural perceptions of pain and these different things, I wanted to eventually get to and dig into the disparity between men and women and how pain is treated and discussed there. Because I know for a fact, every single day in silence, women hide their pain. They work through their pain. They feel obligated to ignore their pain. They're told it doesn't exist. But then like Michael Jordan plays Game 5 with the flu 25 years ago, and he's a legend, and we talk about him until the end of days. It's like women gave birth to humans. Based on that alone, they have to be wired to endure pain in a way that I can't possibly conceive of. But culturally, they are associated with the not tough side of the spectrum. They're dismissed as being dramatic. And before I get to the can technology fix it, I guess the first question here is, what the hell? Why do we do that, do you think, Alan? And even in your experience, Daniel, why do you think culturally this is kind of a thing that we've landed on, that this is the default association for the female experience? I don't know. I really don't know. I know there are a lot of people that study gender differences and pain perception. And I think that would be a great conversational point to roll over with them. I don't know what the origin of that would be. I do know it exists, and I've seen that in my patients. And so I think more along the line of what Alan was saying, what can we do to gather information that can help us better understand pain?
The aim is to better detect what pain expressions exist already or what other factors that may be actionable in terms of treatment. So whether patients are male, female, whatever culture, how can we develop models to better understand and treat these patients? Can we demonstrate to ourselves that the treatments that we have available are the right treatments for one, and then are also functioning the way that we, meaning the clinician and the patient together, hope that they would? Yeah. And again, I'm just going to use the complicated word again. It's really complicated. I mean, it's hard to do this with your brain, right? I mean, to sit down and after a lot of clinical training, it's really hard and takes a lot of energy and focus to do that on an individual level, much less try to define a model that can operate at scale. Yeah. So I think what Alan was suggesting is some form of decision support, which is kind of the holy grail for personalized medicine, data-driven medicine, whatever you want to call it. And it requires a lot of really thoughtful people getting together to understand which features are important. And then also, how do we manage all this data and what sort of outcomes are we interested in targeting there? For sure. And yeah, just through my lens hearing Alan talk about that, my thought was this tool would be fantastic to help close that gap and offer a unified experience for every individual, exactly across sex, across culture, across whatever. And I mean, like I said, we're not going to solve all the world's problems today, but... What? We are but a lowly podcast. Exactly. So talking about that lofty goal, how does technology help combat those disparities? How does technology help us? And you started to touch on a little bit of that, Alan. You know, is this stuff that it really, like we've talked about before, how AI helps scale, it helps enhance existing abilities, right, and opens the door to new abilities that we didn't previously have access to. So in short, how do we see technology closing that gap?
I mean, I think there, we've talked a little bit about digital sort of medicine, digital therapies. I think that there's also a place in putting digital tools into your doctor's hands. And I think giving them quantitative information, and this is maybe Dan can speak more to this because he writes a lot about this in his book, but just giving and surfacing quantitative information as context could lead to more objective outcomes, I think, in certain ways where it's like, well, like you've diagnosed it this way for this patient. But this is what you think we think you would have said if the patient had done exactly the same things and they were male instead of female or something like that, based on all the statistics that we've done on your decision making so far. I think those kinds of tools would be really interesting to look into. I would love to have those tools. I'm trying to develop something like that in our lab here. And the primary reason why I'm personally interested in them is my skills as a clinician wax and wane, depending on what time of day, whether I'm caffeinated well, you know, whether I slept well the night before. And, you know, I've had twins or my wife had twins eight months ago yesterday. And so the sleep variability is a significant factor. And so being able to have a way to operationalize what it is that I think is important, not even looking for new information yet. Right. Just right now, can I articulate what I think is important? And can I make sure that I have the checks and in my clinical work to survey those things every time? Yeah, that's a huge lift. And in some ways, you know, standardized note taking through electronic medical records is trying to do that. You know, there are certain things that clinicians look for at every visit in order to be able to create a billable account encounter. Right. So that's one thing that we as a discipline have decided should be checked every time. But then in every discipline, there are other factors that you're supposed to look for. And so having tools to identify that information, make sure I check that information and also synthesize that information in the correct way at the correct time.
I think it would be hugely valuable. Some people, there's also something else that's really interesting, is there's such variability in clinical skills, because so much of what clinicians do is in our heads. If you've been to two doctors, you might have had very different experiences at those doctors. A large part of that is, even if you use the same words to describe your experience, your blood pressure is the same, quantitative values aside. The way that that physician synthesizes information in their brain is largely dependent on their cognitive ability, and also a reflection of their clinical training and experience, which varies widely clinician to clinician. That speaks to actually another thing that's come up on the show. We've talked about this in the context of other kinds of training, which is the ability to have sort of a digital training where a person, powered by some sort of avatar AI technology, can embody the actual situation. You can have a digital patient who's the same and responds to questions and actually kind of embodies the average responses of somebody who has some level of pain. Then you could have different physicians talking to that same patient, and you could give feedback and say, actually, you diagnosed this level of pain, or you prescribed this outcome, and this is what the average doctor did in this situation. I love that. And it's exactly the same. It's control, because normally you don't have any kind of level of control, and so there's actually no way to do that kind of comparison. So that is a beautiful idea. I love that idea. So right now in medical training, they try to do something like that with standardized patients. So throughout medical school and even, I guess, in some residency programs, you'll have essentially a simulation lab, but with actual people where they have a script that they read through and they've studied, and they have certain information that if I ask the standardized patient a specific question, they're meant to respond.
But there's so much subjectivity there, and having an AI avatar-based tool, that's a great idea. I love that idea. I would love to have done that during medical training or even now, so brilliant. It's just such a fascinating use of the technology, and we've seen it, you're right, Alan, a couple of times on this show and on both sides of it too, right? We've seen it used as a training tool for doctors and things of that nature, and we've seen it too, where individuals, patients seem to be more open to talking to AI and more open to revealing, truthfully reporting their symptoms. This kind of comes up. There's a little bit in your book that I loved, Daniel, where you ask, why do pregnant women ask Google and not their doctors questions like, is wine safe to drink when I'm pregnant? Your wife's like, dude, so they don't get judged. Right. Right. And it's just, anytime we see that interaction where we replace one side of the human element with this avatar side, it's really fascinating, but there is something we've talked about. People are more open, they're more comfortable because they don't expect judgment, and it's perceived as unbiased, but Alan and Daniel, is that inherently true? Is the computer going to be unbiased, or is it only as unbiased as we've trained it to be, right? How does that side of it work? I mean, this is probably more Alan's domain, but I tied it with the ladder there. Yeah. What do you think, Alan? Well, the bias is sort of, it's more identifiable, reproducible, it can be understood, it can be manipulated, right? It depends on what kind of bias you're talking about, but if you're talking about an avatar that maybe you can manipulate the actual physical features of the avatar completely independent of the psychological features of the avatar. And so you can actually decouple what would ordinarily be in everyday life, potentially a bias that exists because of culture, because of learning and all of that. You can completely decouple those things, and you can actually see their effects on the person talking to the avatar. And so it's this kind of mirror for our biases that if we're careful...
And we use good methods, we can actually make it an objective mirror and a replicable one and a measurable one, as opposed to having just ingrained biases that we just can't do anything about. And a lot of that also has to do with how we kind of train the AI. If we train the AI on data, that's actually from everyday life, which is not controlled, and it's just, you know, the same data that humans normally respond to, then it will kind of inherit those biases, right? But if we train the AI on data, like we're doing, where, you know, the same different people are forming the same expressions, and the AI has to kind of figure out ways to ignore perceptual effects due to the person's demographic features, for example, or their physical features and just attend to the expression. And then we apply that now less biased model to data from everyday life, we can actually create something that is decoupled from those ingrained biases a little bit more. Awesome. Yeah, I was thinking about that, because there was a great Last Week Tonight piece, I don't know if it was a year or so ago, just about how the medical industry is kind of biased in favor of men, not just like the providers and things I was mentioning earlier, but like even a lot of the science, most of it's tested and built for men with this, like, I'm sure it'll work for women to attitude. And it's like, you know, how do we ensure technology doesn't exacerbate these? I don't know if you've answered that right there. It's just we build the non-biased models. We'll move on. I'll go on. Yeah, go for it. Just maybe I could piggyback on that. I think it's also, like what Alan was saying, because you can identify where the bias might be in an AI algorithm, or if they quantify the amount of bias, then you can change it. And I think an algorithm is much easier to change and much more trainable than humans. I think humans are very difficult algorithms to train. And you could just look at the history of medicine for an example of how quickly new technologies are adopted. Yeah. And so having those decision support tools, it makes a lot of sense. One might say it's quite complicated. One might. One might. Quick side note, I just, that bit in the book, I really enjoyed.
I want to acknowledge the absence of an actual female voice in this part of the conversation. It's not lost on us. There's three dudes sitting here talking about how hard it is out there. Our intentions are pure. The ideas are sound, but without that perspective, this conversation is regrettably incomplete, but that just leaves the door open for another episode and further discussion down the road for sure. You talk about how long it takes things to advance in the medical industry, Daniel, and you open up talking about the example of how 100 years ago, it was Franklin Delano Roosevelt that sparked the move to invest in knowledge about heart disease and this whole study in an entire town, let's do it. Why haven't we seen a similar watershed moment yet with pain, with mental health, with all of these things? Are we just waiting for another president to suffer from the same problems we are, or what's holding us up? It's complicated. I think there are a lot of people really trying hard to develop tools that'll be useful. The technologies that I described in my book, I'm very optimistic about them, but they're very much in the research stages right now. It's hard enough to describe what to do in a clinical sense with relatively simple conditions like hypertension, for example, something which we have been able to parameterize pretty cleanly, even though the parameter changes over time as we gather more information. Developing decision models for how to treat hypertension is very hard because individual physiology comes into play, whether or not someone will take a medication comes into play. Considering all of those factors has proven to be a very complex process. I'm optimistic that these technologies will add value, but before they're adopted by clinicians or by...
I think it does make a lot of sense to really look at the evidence and then see what added value they might bring. For sure. Thank you for that. Alan, I didn't want to cut you off. It looked like you were about to say something. Yeah, I mean, I'm not sure if this totally hits at your question, but I think in general, advances in measurement that rely on AI are slow to emerge in medicine, specifically because the field of AI really thrives on open data. What makes clinical data unique is that it's incredibly closed off. The people who control the flow of data are at the very top. It's very difficult for someone at the very bottom to climb that tower. I think we need more controlled pipelines that go down from the top and get data into researchers' hands without too much activation energy. I think that's going to be a real challenge, but I think it's starting to happen a little bit. Of course, you have to still control the degree to which sensitive information is released. You still have to have a process wherein things are conducted inside of a very secure ecosystem. But there needs to be some sort of way that researchers can serve themselves data from that ecosystem if they have the right credentials. Because otherwise, I think that's the principal barrier to any sort of AI solutions emerging in this space. What do you think about – and I'd love to know, Daniel, how you feel about the recent news. I'll get to making this relevant, but with Elon Musk buying Twitter, without the risk of pulling something out of context, but there is a fascinating part of your book where you say literally just 10 tweets can help you better understand a patient because of the data there in those tweets. When they tweeted them, you can gauge their mental state from what they tweeted, all those different things, just that little bit of data. With Elon having bought Twitter, he's not just purchased a platform. He's purchased an incredible amount of data. Are you optimistic that access to that for diabetes…
I don't know. I'm not sure. I don't know how to assess that. I don't, I don't personally know Elon Musk. I wish I did. He seems like a pretty interesting fellow, right? I do know that he's been very successful in the domains that he's touched so far. Um, and, um, you know, that's a fair statement. That's a valid point. Shame on me for asking that question. Let me reframe it. What would, what would be the, the, the best outcome? Like for you, like an ideal world, he calls you up, he goes, one, I want to hang out. And two, uh, I want to do X, Y, and Z. Like what would be awesome and super helpful for, for you and what you've learned about the potential held within that data for patients? I think so. And, and I don't personally do research on Twitter data. There are a lot of people who have spent a lot, a lot more time than me thinking about it. And, you know, Elon would probably want to talk to them first, but, uh, what I would be interested in doing is seeing if he could model behavior over time. And so actually, uh, something that I've been interested in, uh, in, in reading about, uh, is there's this beautiful infographic. I can't remember if it was New York times or the wall street journal, but they had a, it was a two dimensional plot of Elon Musk's tweets, uh, since he got on Twitter, it's like a heat map, right? So it had day by time of day across the entire time he's been on Twitter. And I was like, wow, this is a beautiful circadian rhythm for Elon Musk's Twitter behavior. And I was like, well, how cool is that? Right. And, and, you know, I, I kind of, as a researcher, I kind of wanted to see if, uh, you know, the content of his tweets, uh, changed based on the time of day, uh, was he more likely to be, uh, frustrated or, you know, express, you know, certain sentiments during certain times of day, uh, were there stressful periods? Like when he was going towards the.
On the launch of the three, what did he call it? Production hell or something like that. That period of his life, did the expression change in his tweets? I mean, so there's a really rich data set there, even looking at him as an individual. And if he buys Twitter, and he wants to hire one of these people who do cool research, seems like a pretty worthwhile investment. And I'd be happy to discuss it with him over a Lone Star beer. Why not? Why not indeed? Alan, we're coming in the homestretch. This is kind of a version of my blue sky question. What do you think would be the best outcome? So many people are so afraid of this whole Elon's bought Twitter thing. But what do you think? Let's be optimistic. What would be a really cool outcome for you guys and the research you're doing over there? One thing I think that he suggested that I think is kind of a good idea is open sourcing the algorithm that's used to surface tweets. I think what will happen is people will decide it's not really that controversial at the end of the day. It's not an algorithm that says, okay, you are liberal, you get to post something. It definitely doesn't have anything like that in it. But it will definitely assuage concerns that people have just by making it open source. And I don't think it's a big challenge for Twitter's business model. And the interpretability issue, I think a lot of researchers will be able to go in, and it'll take a long time to understand what the algorithm does, because even I think the company itself doesn't really fully understand the algorithm and interpretability is a bigger project than building the algorithm. But independent researchers going in and saying, this is what the algorithm does for this kind of tweet. And this is what the algorithm does for this kind of tweet. And it's probably going to be some things that you would expect that are good, like, okay, this is an interesting tweet that more people want to see. And then there's other things where it's like, oh, well, this is how trolls have managed to manipulate this is that they realize the algorithm will surface things that make people angry in a specific way much more often because people engage with them and so forth. And so I think people will come up with corrective measures for that. So I think there's a big opportunity there. I don't think that the idea that you can just remove most of the moderation is actually going
I had a bunch of stuff I was hoping to get to, but you guys, this has just been so fascinating and every second of it was awesome for me and I think for our listeners as well. Daniel, this just means I'm sorry, but you're going to have to come back because I've got a million questions for you and I've enjoyed having you on here so much. This has been a lot of fun. Thank you. I'm glad. It's been so much fun having you. You know what? This hasn't been complicated. No, this has been very easy. Complicated? Well, I don't know. The AV signal, you know, kind of came in there. Fair enough. We've had some AV complications, but I found it very easy talking to you, man, and I've really appreciated you being here and I can't thank you enough for making time. So thank you again for joining us. It means a lot to us here in the show. For everyone out there listening, check out Daniel's book, Reading Our Minds, The Rise of Big Data Psychiatry. I'm telling you guys, it's fascinating. And as I've said many times in this show, and it's very apparent, I am no scientist. And I thought it had some incredible info and insight in there. It was a really good read. So def check that out. Alan, always a pleasure. Thank you for making time to host with me. Couldn't do it without you. And talking about making time, thank you to our listeners. We know you had a lot of choices in your podcast distraction today, and we appreciate you letting us provide the background to your commute, workout, or whatever it is you're doing while listening to this. And hey, if you want to make the jump from listener to participant, shoot us an email at thefeelingslabathume.ai, T-H-E-F-E-E-L-I-N-G-S-L-A-B-A-T-H-U-E-M-E.AI. Ask a question, suggest a topic or a guest, or just say hello. That's another choice that I'll leave up to you. We'll be back next week with another exciting episode of The Feelings Lab. Farewell for now, my friends. From The Feelings Lab, I'm Matt Forte. Thanks again, everybody, and please stay safe out there.
The Feelings Lab, www.feelingslab.com
