Hello, world. What is up? Welcome to the Feelings Lab. I'm your host, Matt Forte, and for today's episode, we're talking about mirth. That's right, mirth, or amusement rather. And man, am I thrilled. After the last couple episodes, we thought we'd let the pendulum swing in the other direction and tackle something a little less intense. Now, as a man who performed Shakespeare all throughout my high school career, I'm quite familiar with the term. And believe me, if there's one thing I love, it's to be amused. Not too long ago, I would frequent parks built entirely around this purpose. But what is mirth? Why do we feel amusement? As we get older, is it harder to access it? Or are we simply jaded from overexposure and need to look a little harder? According to Google Books Ngram Viewer, use of the word mirth peaked around the 1820s and then declined steadily for 100 years or so, hitting an all-time low around the mid-80s, which more or less tracks. However, since then, we've been trending up. The date only runs through 2019, though, so the jury is still out on how the pandemic has impacted our use of the word mirth. But my money is on it didn't help. Anyway, despite most associating the word with a New Yorker cartoon, or rightfully, something written in the 1800s, we might actually be engaging in mirth or mirth-related activities a lot more than we realize, especially if you've encountered any of the work from today's guest. Once again, by my virtual side, my friends and co-hosts, Dr. Alan Cowen and Daniel Credit Cobber here. And speaking of that guest, I can't imagine a better fit, a prolific maker of mirth, if you will. He's the author of the acclaimed collection of funny true stories called Vacationland. He also wrote three books of fake facts and invented trivia, all of them New York Times bestsellers. You've seen him on The Daily Show, FX's Married, HBO's Bored to Death, and Cinemax's The Knick. His fantastic podcast, Judge John Hodgman, actually celebrated its 500th episode earlier this year. He also contributes a weekly column under the same name for the New York Times Magazine. Please welcome to the show, author, actor, humorist, the great John Hodgman, everybody. John, thank you for being here. How are you doing, sir? Thank you so much. I am as
I'm okay, plus to be here. Oh, we got the plus, I'm honored. It's a lot of fun. And I'm really excited to talk about mirth and really, frankly, moved to mirth by the idea that mirth peaked in the 1820s. What a mirthful decade, the rise of the first industrial revolution, child labor, slavery, the Missouri Compromise, 1820. What a laugh that was to invent the state of Maine so as to state the slave state of Missouri. Yeah, a lot of fun was happening in the 1820s. Probably the most fun imaginable, according to this chart from Google that I've only just learned about. You had to laugh. You had to. You had to. 1820s. Yeah. What else could you do? I would argue we're at a similar point where you're correct. We have to laugh. Those are the only options. Also, I wonder if we biologically have to laugh, but that's another question for later on. Keep talking. Yeah. One we may very well answer today. Right. I love it. Stick around for the end of the podcast to find out the answer. Until then, listen to this ad for a mattress. It is so amazing to have you on this show, John. Just real quick, not just as a fan of podcasts, which I am, but as a JJH fan, but you've popped up in so many of my favorite podcasts. Your presence on our show is a true podcast badge of honor. So thank you, sir. It is. It's nice to have you. Thank you very much. And in the world of comedy, regular podcast appearances mean your career is over. So that's the more you're on podcasts, the more you know, you are no longer a relevant comedian to a lot of television producers. The pandemic changed all rules. I'm just saying. Pre-pandemic in the old world. Right. If you're doing podcasts, that means you're not doing standup. Post-1820s.
Which frankly I am the light of, because I can barely stand up as it is. Delightful. Alan, Danielle, before we get any deeper into things, are you two as okay as possible? Doing great. Thanks for asking. I'm going to match John's okay plus with an okay plus. Probably the extra plus being because of his presence. That's very kind of you. Thank you very much. No, it's great to see. Great to see. Of course, we worked together on the Apple ad so many years ago, it was a little embarrassing that you didn't remember that we worked together. No, the reverse is true. Danielle was one of the creative, you worked for Apple in design, right? Oh yeah. Well, I actually, initially I was working at Mao at Shia Tse and then I went over that rainbow bridge into the design group at Apple. Basically, you got me the job. So I mean, thank you for that. And every career move afterwards, it's all down to your honor, Judge John Hodgman. Thank you. Thank you for the job. And thank you for changing my life completely and everything else that happened afterwards. Still, every now and then I wake up and I'm like, that happened. That was incredible. Thank you. It was certainly a moment in time. My favorite thing about that, not to make this all about our relationship a decade ago, but actually what I loved is that everyone loved you so, so, so much. It was so, I love the twist of, it was something that was meant to tell the story of Apple and for people to understand the differences between a Mac and a PC. And yet the most beloved character was yours truly. Everyone loves the villain more than the hero. The villain is always a more interesting character. I don't argue with that. You're certainly more mirthful. I was going to say, I would think, I agree with that, but I also think you're not giving yourself enough credit. I think you have a big part to do. And I was going to bring this up a little bit later. Just that very notion of you were meant to be the foil, but everybody, the only critique I ever heard was we all love the PC guy. He's fantastic. Yeah.
So what should we talk about first, whether we are biologically determined to laugh or how lovable I am? I want to hit both. Couldn't they be inextricably linked, sir? I believe you may have overlooked the scientific connection between those two things. It's very possible. It's very possible. We're going to come back to it. Let's start at the easiest place to start. Alan, I'm going to come to you, sir, as the man behind the maps, charting human emotion with detail and nuance previously unseen. Break this one down for us. Tell me about mirth or amusement. Actually, you know what? Let's go there for a second. Am I OK to use mirth and amusement interchangeably like that as such? Give me a little bit of background. Yeah, I think mirth is used in the same way that copulation is used. It's sort of a weird scientific phrase that you definitely know about the lifestyle of comedians. There is no copulation. I meant the word mirth in the word copulation, but it could be that too. But it also reflects the fact that a scientist talking about humor, sort of, there's something so unfunny about it, kind of like a sex ed teacher talking about sex. So, maybe it's similar in that way to use the word mirth. But yeah, as soon as you start talking about that, it sucks the air out of the room. But no, that's one of the things that has been one of the most deadly things you can do is try to explain why jokes work, why humor is. And because, you know, you're dissecting a live animal. It's gross. And it's not a terrible image that I'm sorry I conjured, but you know what I mean. It's the thing dies on the table when you're trying to examine something as weird and magical and as elusive as humor. So, that's the preface where I was going to say. But yeah, I think that if you're trying to dissect humor, the most basic kind of form of humor in human behavior is tickling. Probably because it relates to sort of the play fight instinct that you see in other mammals. So, almost every mammal engages in play fight at a young age. And they do something really similar to laughing, whether it's like opening their mouths, baring their...
So, where does that come from? So, laughter signals that you're emptying your lungs and it's a signal that you can't possibly be threatening right now because you're not prepared to take effortful action. When you're emptying your lungs, your bodily movements can't be aligned with your breath and suddenly you become weakened and you're advertising that. And so, that's why it's involved in play fighting because both parties to the play fight want to advertise that they don't actually mean to hurt each other. They're like tickling each other, going for like the most vulnerable parts of the body, but the laughter signals, hey, this is not a real fight. If it was a real fight, tickling wouldn't work, basically. Yeah, but the tickler isn't the one who's, I mean, in human tickling relationships, the tickler doesn't laugh, the tickly laughs. That is true. Most lies in the tickly, we may say. Well, I respectfully disagree. I think tickling is a form of torture. And bodily intrusion, and there isn't anything funny about it. And I'm speaking as a dad who used to tickle my own children until I appreciated like, oh, this is a form of bodily control. Wait, hang on a second. What made the flip? At what point did your children turn around one day and go, this is a form of torture? Or, oh, uh... When did you stop tickling and become an advocate for the ceasing of all ticklage? Well, no, I'm not against ceasing tickling because it is play. And all sorts of play are allowed where there is mutual affirmative consent. But part of it came up, so I have a podcast called Judge John Hodgman, where people call in with disputes that are usually interpersonal
And I kind of listen to both sides and say, you know, who's right and who's wrong. And a lot of this has to do with who loads the dishwasher incorrectly or it's philosophical, like you know, is a hot dog a sandwich? No, it is not. But, and I don't want to talk about it, but because it's not. No need to. Okay. Okay. Are we cool with this? Oh, I'm on board. Okay, great. Thank you. A hundred percent. You're going to get these letters, not me. So it's fine. It's your podcast. You know, a number of times there is, we've had people write in saying my partner tickles me and I don't like it and I say no, and they do it anyway, which obviously is not cool. Yeah. And there was a similar case where a couple who were living together, a man and a woman, the guy would jump out and scare his spouse and thought that was really funny. And she didn't, for some reason, like to be scared, didn't like to be wandering into a house full of, with her husband hiding in a closet to jump out and scare her. He found that to be really, really funny. And the two cases seemed very, very similar to me all of a sudden, right? Because we can say, oh yeah, jumping out and scaring someone is kind of mean. And if they're not into it, then you shouldn't do it. But tickling always gets this pass. It's just tickling, right? But I was listening to this podcast with Fred Armisen about horror and reflecting on how it's been noted many, many times before by people smarter than me, that screaming and laughing are very similar physical expressions, especially in that they are involuntary. And humor, much like horror, is designed to provoke a very specific, involuntary physical vocal reaction that is kind of mysterious to us, although you seem to have got it figured out, Doc. So, you know, triggering, using tickling to trigger laughter from a professional humorist point of view, I can't just go out into the audience and start tickling people.
It's a very cheap way to get laughs because it is truly, it truly is like an automatic response. It would work. I submit that you would still sell a lot of tickets. It would just be a different crowd. I submit that's, yeah, you could be right there. But I mean, I'm not, I'm not like I, yeah, so on my podcast, you know, I've become very much more sensitive than I used to be about issues like touching people's bodies, tickling them and that sort of thing. And, and, you know, that I think, I think my kids and I are fine, we will go through whatever amount of therapy we have to go through. But you know, it is true that tickling is taking control of a person's nervous system in a, in a way that is, is a little bit scary and should be considered thoughtfully before you deploy. And in terms of comedy and humor, it's most interesting to me in that it speaks specifically to that thing, which is that mirth is not predictable and not controllable by the person who is feeling it. So So Alan, I'm going to, in terms of the, the alliterative science of mapping mirth, I'm curious, where do we find, and John, this is something that I always get excited about in each episode is these, like how closely cuddled and nestled all of these emotions you wouldn't expect to be with something like mirth. Also listening to your stories and the experiences of other people on the podcast, your podcast, I'm curious, Alan, what lives around mirth is discomfort or what's around there? Because you know, it's funny, the, the kind of 1820s reference for mirth makes sense, because I feel like we should all have powdered wigs on just to be able to be worthy of talking about mirth. It feels very period, period sensitive term, but, but anyway, so, so curious about that because mirth, mirth almost as a word is like in a comfortable version of humor. So what to define it exactly and how it's different than other things. Yeah. I mean, we use the word amusement most often and people see amusement in laughter. So what else is associated with laughter or things like laughter? I mean, the, the
The big ones are on one end of the spectrum embarrassment, and we had an episode on that. And people have this nervous laugh they do when they're embarrassed, and also when they're sort of meeting each other for the first time and all kinds of other somewhat socially ambiguous situations. So, that pretty much speaks to the side of the person being tickled. It's like, I mean no harm, please, I violated some social norm, but at the end of the day, like I didn't mean to or blah, blah, and then they recover, other people laugh along with them. And the other side of the spectrum of the laugh, I would say, is the dominant laugh. And people have studied this as like submissive dominant, but I think of it as embarrassment versus probably triumph or contempt. So the triumph laugh is like ha-ha, and like contempt is like ha-ha. You know, hearty, ha-ha. Yeah. That's not even a real laugh, that's just sarcasm. Yeah. Now I'm laughing out of embarrassment. So, okay, so the person being tickled, they're signaling, I can't hurt you right now. Tickling, you know, you've probably won the play fight if you're successfully tickling the other person and you've sort of gotten to their most vulnerable spots or whatever. And then tickling in mammals, you see, evolves also into other somewhat more complex play behaviors like chasing each other. Mice chase each other and laugh. So even when they're not touching each other, it's the same laugh as when they tickle each other and they can play little games. And human children and humans of all ages, to some extent, do that as well. This is that mouse laughter that only you can hear? Yeah. I don't have it, but if you lower the frequency of it, yeah. No, I believe it. I think maybe little kids can hear it. It's like one of those really high-frequency sounds that adults can't hear. Like Cloris Leachman laughing? It's like that. I love her voice so much. Okay. So then the other end of the spectrum is like the dominant laugh triumph. And what that usually means is like, and again, it's like emptying the lungs, signaling that you do not need to expend any effort right now, either to say like, I submit, or to say, I don't need to expend any effort anymore.
I'm so dominant over you, and so it actually has some really negative ways in which it appears. So that's why I think it appears in bullying, where the bully is laughing, teasing, that sort of thing. I mean, teasing can be good, but it can also be very bad. The classic Nelson from the Simpsons, ha-ha. Yeah, exactly. Emptying the lungs. That's really interesting. I had never considered that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And signaling. And I'm asthmatic. Like, I think about my lungs a lot. So that's the space of amusement. And of course, there's adoration, too. There's an adoration laugh that you associate with little puppies, and there's actually many other kinds of laughs. There's kind of like a burn kind of laugh, where somebody is kind of like a shot and frayed laugh almost. And you can actually identify all of these, at least within cultures. And across cultures, you just see people laughing in response to things that are meant to be amusing and probably a few more variations. When you were, at the risk of asking a question I've asked every episode of this podcast, but I'm truly fascinated to be brought into the lab with you when you're doing the experiments and collecting all this data. Did you accidentally develop a separate data set of like what people are amused by and not amused by in your attempts to elicit amusement? Did you have things that you thought, all right, this will get the reactions we're looking for and then it didn't read or it didn't play in the same way like a standup tries out material in a room? Talk me through that process. I'm curious. Yeah. I mean, so that we kind of... So most of my experiments are done online. So we did one where we looked at millions of YouTube videos and we actually labeled the facial expression that goes with laughter, which is more diagnostic of amusements. And we looked at what the context where that occurred. And across cultures, there were contexts like jokes and parody, where you could pull that from like the title of the video or the description. And so, you know that's what it's about. And there's always laughing. Any culture you look at, it's one of the strongest associations you see. But what people are laughing at is really different across cultures. So I think like the sense of humor and what is funny is very culture-specific and evolves over time. Very cool. Although there are certain universals like physical humor, probably. Farts. Yeah, farts.
I know I was in high school when I performed the Shakespeare that I performed, but I don't recall a time in my life that was more filled with over-exaggerated groin thrusts than that time. Everybody that direct anytime, any director was like, you really want to lean into it. And like, that was a big, so yeah, farts were definitely in there as well. Right. And you know, that has a lot to do with the breaking of certain cultural taboos about what is societally acceptable or not. And a lot of the humor in Shakespeare is about subversion of societal roles. Yeah. That's a really good social norms determine a lot of it. Like if something is not a violation of social norms, it's probably not funny. Yeah. Right. And you know, it's interesting. I'd never really thought of comedy in terms of play fighting before, but I should have because so much of the language, particularly of stand-up comedy is very aggressive. You know, when you do really well, you've killed an audience, you know, when you don't do very well, you die on stage, you know? And there is a measure of playfulness and fightiness in a lot of comedy. And in terms of, particularly in stand-up, in terms of attitudes of dominance and taking attitudes of dominance, then posing as submissive, then, you know, it's all in storytelling, obviously, but it's hijacking. It seems a lot of those very primal play fight instincts too. Oh, yeah. I mean, diffuse is a fight. Like if it's a real fight, it can become a play fight. And then I know we talk about Dacker's research more often when he's not here for some reason, but Dacker's research has shown that when people are talking about serious conflicts in their lives, if they can tease each other about it and evoke laughter, that's a much more effective way to resolve the conflict than to really attack each other. It's probably what you do in your judge role. Oh, no, I just attack people.
Well, it elevates it to process rather than content. It lightens it a little bit to where you can step outside of your roles and try on other feelings to reposition or recalibrate. John, I heard this thing a very long time ago. I feel like I might have heard it in the like Brian McKee adaptation like moment where it was like the idea that comedy is an angry art. And what I found to be true for a lot of your work, actually, whether it's whether it's you, whether it's you in combination with a writer's room, whether it's you spontaneous in the moment on your podcast, is it's almost like, what's the way of describing truth in a way that catches us off guard so that we can think about it a different way, feel it a different way so we can handle it. And I'm just curious for you, when you are thinking about material, whether it's on your own or with other writers, what is the feeling that you have when you know you're on to something, or where you're like, this is the way this wants to work, or this is the way we want to put this forward? You know, I, I first, I have to take a little issue with the description of comedy being an angry art. There are a lot of angry people in comedy, for sure. And, you know, as we were just discussing, I think there's a lot of comedy that that is linked to and flows from, flows from some deep aggression, right? And yet, I think I and certain other comedians that I know, like Kristen Schaal, and I don't even really consider myself, I consider myself a humorist because most of my work is done sitting down. My work is not necessarily designed to provoke laugh out loud laughter. I'm grateful if I get a wry chuckle, that's all I need. But real comedians like Kristen Schaal, or Eugene Merman, or Wyatt Snack, or Josh Gondelman, you'd be hard pressed to say that they were coming at this place, coming at comedy from a point of anger. Why, why it can be very angry. I think the way I understood the angry part was not necessarily the actual
For me, the moment that I hear the term mirth peaked in the 1820s, that makes me go to Wikipedia to say, well, I know the 1820s wasn't fun for a lot of people. Let's, let's unpack that a little bit. Who was feeling mirth in the 1820s? And that's a pretty typical comedic move, right? Which is to take a presumption and turn it on its head and show what was really happening or really going on. When I worked at the Daily Show, my job was to, speaking of the 1820s, when I worked at the Daily Show a long, long time ago, I was their resident expert. And my job was to present, not as a comedian, but as a very self-serious white male Tweety expert on all subjects who would say the most horrible things, but would be allowed to say those things and be taken at a kind of face value because of the authority that I projected. Right? So, for example, the kind of game that I would play on the Daily Show, we'd be talking about economics, which was not, on its face, very funny. And I would say to John, be called in to comment on some weird foreign currency issue. You know, he would say, it's not very funny, is it? I would say, well, they don't call economics the dismal science for nothing. So that's a true, true saying, right? And he said, because it's so boring. I was like, no, because it was named for Sir Eustace Dismal, the British economist in the Industrial Revolution who first proposed making smokestacks out of children. And then those are the wry chuckles that I was hoping for. Thank you very much. But just the grimmest picture.
The future of the industrial revolution. And I followed by saying, of course, the problem was that if you make the smokestacks out of children, who will you get to clean them? Because that's a horrible, horrible truth that children are used to, you know, to clean smokestacks during the industrial revolution, because they were so small and free. They work for nothing. Too soon. Yeah. So yeah, too soon. Exactly. So, you know, that that was kind of the that would be a line that I would get on where, again, it's a kind of a breaking of taboo. It's taking taking the audience to a scary place and saying something with a straight face that is true is so ridiculous. Right. And yet it's true that it provokes laughter and then giving permission to to laugh at it, I think, was sort of the game that I that I would play. Now, I guess that that is angry to the point of view of humor can be a social corrective. We talk about child labor on The Daily Show in, you know, whatever year it was, 1829, the last time I was on the show or whatever. And we talk about we talk about child labor to the industrial revolution, but of course, child labor continues today. So ideally, that is an expression of a value that through joking kind of maybe raises awareness on some particular level, aside from just saying something sort of ridiculous and horrific with a straight face. And it's also a commentary on the idea of white male authority, which is always was the joke of my character on the show, which is like people were showing up on people were showing up on cable news, real cable news, not fake cable news like The Daily Show with just an expert label underneath them. And they could say whatever they wanted. There was no proof that they knew anything about what they were talking about, the erosion of expertise, which is I'm not sure if you notice something that's been happening a lot lately in our culture. Well, that was something that I was always because I remember first seeing you on The Daily Show back in the I don't know, I think I watched it by candlelight. Right. And we used to do it as shadow puppet plays. I was out there in the field. That's right. And, and you were talking about your book, the area of my expertise, and I immediately got it. And, and I combed through it. And I described that to friends.
And this is the first time that we've had a podcast that is as engaging as the previous one. And for the first time, we're going to be talking about the ability to empathize with emotion. And I'm going to be talking about that in a second. I'm going to be talking about that in a second. And I'm going to be talking about that in a second. So if you're watching this podcast, I want you to have this air, this character that you've carried with you. Now we talked before we hit record about the PC guy. Everybody found the PC guy lovable when you were an expert on the Daily Show. Are you going to record any of that? We might have, I don't know. I can put, you know what, we have it now. Anybody else want to verify that we said John is very lovable? High. Very high. Well, I mean, it's interesting because you say that that book is, and I'm not disagreeing with you, you're making me reflect on it. That first book that I wrote, The Areas of My Expertise, which was a, you know, pretended to be an almanac of true facts, but all the facts were wildly fake. Like, you know, a list of the nine US presidents who secretly had hooks for hands and stuff like that. Yes, exactly. And it was all, and it's interesting because you describe it as brute force, but I'm a lovable guy. Look at me. I'm not a lovable guy. I'm not a lovable guy. I'm not a lovable guy. I'm not a lovable guy. I'm not a lovable guy. I'm not a lovable guy. I didn't have a bad upbringing. You know what I mean? I'm not expressing my anger at the world, I'm not working through my profound and I think rather problematic fear of the trans community on Netflix, like certain comics. I'm a nice guy, I'm a nice guy here doing nice comedy. But it's true that when I wrote that book, the nine US presidents who had hooks for hands, my rule was that it just couldn't be absurd, it couldn't be the nine US presidents who had fishbowls for heads. There's no referent there. Hooks for hands is this weird, exotic boys' adventure pirate story kind of thing. Plausible. Plausible. Plausible. Plausible. But plausible. Right, exactly.
And also spoke to the reason that I immediately hooked onto it, so to speak, was that, you know, FDR had polio and was in a wheelchair and no one talked about it and no one photographed him in the wheelchair. So this became a way of expressing like how we used to deal with public figures, how they would have these wild out in the open secrets that we don't have anymore. So I would say FDR, you know, of course, had a hook for a hand, but the public never knew because they only... I had two versions of the joke. One was they only ever photographed him from the wrist up. That was the soft version and the other one was no one ever noticed because his hook was shaped like a wheelchair, which makes no sense at all, but you know, you choose, A, B. The thing about my book is I could write all five versions of a joke and it just took up space on the page and I got paid. It just worked that way. But yeah, to that point, to your point of you are not a brute force guy, you are lovable John Hodgman. And so I always enjoyed watching, because you would bring this character that we would see on television is this expert, this person who's, or sometimes in your books, who's arrogant, who's all these things that normally would be off-putting, but we still, you were so charming and endearing. And I just was always fascinated by how you would strike that balance. And if it's something that you had to think about it, like, well, I don't want to be too much of a know-it-all jerk here because then I'll lose them. Or if it came very naturally, because it's just who you are, it's like you said, you're not that guy, you're John. But when you become that guy, the juxtaposition of those two personalities at once is what made it work so well. So did you have to work really hard or was it really easy? Thank you. And it was not hard. I mean, you know, creativity is both the easiest and the hardest thing in the world. Like it's not like I sat down and go, I got to find a way to merge these two personalities and, you know, the fact is that I am a know-it-all asshole, partly. Well, you went to Yale. And I did go to, thank you, I did go to Yale University, which is a four, if you don't know, it's a four-year, four-year accredited college in Southern Connecticut. I am a know-it-all. I've always loved being a know-it-all. I've loved knowing it all, even though I really only know some, to be honest.
I also am a person of, I think, genuine curiosity, and most important is I'm an insecure person who, you know, I like and love people, but I also desire to be liked and loved. Now, you know, I see you all falling over. I may be the only person on earth who feels this way. I'm not sure. All I can speak of is from my experience. And you know, before we got on here, I was like, oh, right. You know, humor is, and again, once again, it's the language of combat. It's disarming, as you put it out. You know, my book was brute force, to be sure, because I just hammered people with these jokes. He's really like one after the other, not caring, little jokes, big jokes, small jokes. It didn't matter. It was just a barrage. It's all language of conflict, which is funny because I am personally deeply, very conflict diverse. And that's the thing. Why? You know, like I always thought of laughter as being a byproduct of screaming, like, you know, my co-host on The Judge John Hodgman Show has a great, serious interview show called Bullseye on NPR. And years ago, he was interviewing a comedian, British comedian named Jimmy Carr, and Jimmy Carr tried to explain laughter as a byproduct of screaming. And like, this is what happens when some time ago, a long time ago, in prehistory, our ancestors were being chased by predators. We were running away from them screaming in order to make ourselves seem bigger and to scare them away. And when that tiger, that saber tooth tiger or whatever, slipped on a banana peel and fell off a cliff and you survived, that scream turned into a laugh of relief, right? That build of tension and then the relief of the punchline is such a big part of any joke, right? Like, that is a creation of a sense of danger and then a resolution of that danger in a way that is a huge relief. And I think that that's a very important insight. But I've had a bigger insight today, Alan, from you about this play fight model for laughter.
And you remove it from the physical and it becomes making jokes in a kind of battle. And why biologically would I need to make a joke, right? Because play fighting, right, among mammals, presumably is rehearsal for getting a mate to choose you, right? You're going to butt your horns against the other male mammal's horns in order to look dominant so that the female most commonly in this animal population would choose you over the weaker one. Yeah. Well, I don't got any horns. You look at me, it's like, who's going to love me? I better have some jokes in my pocket. Do you know what I mean? And it's absolutely true that, you know, like, it really just struck me. It's like, oh, it's like all evolutionary biology is as simple as that. It's like making jokes for so many comedians is the only way that they will get attention and feel briefly dominant in this world among gender, sign of birth, men, macho men, comedians, and even weakling, barely man comedians like me. So it is a social attractor that is nonphysical and it signifies intellectual acuity and to a degree, empathy, you know, knowing how other people work that I think is attractive to other people. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I think it goes hand in hand with the tension part too, but I think building tension, being able to build that tension is also a signal of, I guess, like, whatever verbal strength or mental strength and then being able to unpack that. Let's say skill. Let's say skill. But you're right, it's strength. It's strength. Yeah. And it's true of all storytellers. Can I demand your attention and keep it and control you for a period of time through my words? Well, even just from the perspective of winning a fight, sometimes, you know, playing dead is kind of funny, but it can actually help you survive. And so, there might be other ways in which things kind of evolved out of play fighting that really do signify your ability to survive.
I don't think that I ever realized that Warner Brothers was secretly an animal research lab with everything that happened to Wile E. Coyote. When you just talked about slipping on the banana peel and falling off the cliff, I was like, oh my goodness. Well, if Jimmy Carr's story is to be believed, those were documentaries. That's right. Yes, that's what those were. We've talked a lot, and rightfully so, about amusement and its relation to humor. But I jokingly mentioned in the introduction that I used to go to amusement parks, and amusement parks exist with all different flavors of amusement. There's thrill rides where you can scare yourself. There's parades where everybody's super happy. There's all these different layers. No, no one's happy in a parade. What a waste of time. There's a whole song called I Love a Parade. Yeah, that song was commissioned by Big Parade. Big Parade Corp. Parades, you just stand around in the sun, it's uncomfortable. Or the best case scenario, you're on a float waving because you're a marshal. Could I interest you in a nighttime extravaganza perhaps, instead of a parade? I'll take an extravaganza, just a parade, but I know what you're saying. But you understand amusement, at least in the context of a park, is not limited to the box of I'm going here to laugh at something. How does that work scientifically, Alan? How are you guys accounting for these different flavors of amusement? Do you have different titles for them? Do you categorize them differently? I know the answer, but Alan, if you want to take a swing at it, it's fine. Well, now I feel like I'm going to be wrong, but- No, I think you're going to be right. One of the big ways that we account for them is by mixing them with other emotions. So amusement adoration, amusement awkwardness, amusement plus relief. There's all these different flavors of amusement in that sense. And they all kind of have their own context in which they happen and almost a culture developed around them. Funny animals kind of running into things, it's like amusement adoration. Like those crazy mice that you're always talking about, those laughing mice who are running around and running into each other. Yeah, yeah. Even that, that's physical comedy kind of amusement and there's kind of amusement and empathy.
Empathic pain kind of grown amusement is a thing as well. So, that's one way to conceptualize it. Another way is to think about just different subtypes of amusement. And those do exist. There's different kinds of jokes and people laugh at them in different ways. There's kind of a... I don't know. I think probably John would probably know better about this. But there's kind of a laugh that you do that's acknowledging something's funny without it really being funny, like in response to a pun. There's a laugh that you do when you see somebody in pain that you don't like. It's shot in Freudic kind of laugh. Anyway. And then there's the laugh of, you know, this is true of people who've worked in comedy their whole lives, which is the laugh that doesn't exist, but is sincere, which is, yeah, that's funny. I've seen it all, but that'll make someone laugh. So, that's a real phenomenon that exists within the world of professional comedians. That's not a pet peeve where someone says, that's really funny. That comes from a place, or is it dependent upon the person, if that's what you get? You know, working with Jon Stewart, he would sometimes just go like, oh, that's funny. And he took pleasure in it because he'd been working with jokes for so long that he understood, oh, that's a machine that works. That's a joke that works. That will work. But sometimes it's just like, you know, when you're in a rush to put on a daily show, it's like, yeah, that's funny. Just keep going. Yeah. Yeah. But, you know, enjoyment of life is far and few between. And amusement is something we seek to survive emotionally, right? I mean, we tell stories around a campfire. I mean, this is my own prehistory. This is my own version of Jimmy Carr's completely unscientific, unresearched prehistoric speculation, right? But, you know, we gather around a fire to tell stories to each other, simply to take our mind off the fact that we are surrounded by darkness that wants us to die, you know, with things in it that want
And I think, you know, stories do a lot in every culture. They form social cohesion. They tell myths of the group's origin. They create a sense of history, often false history, and group specialness. But also sometimes they just distract you. And that's a really important function of story. And jokes are just very, very short stories. Every joke is a little narrative. It reminds me of something, Daniel, you had said earlier that stuck with me, which was I think you were saying you wanted to explore humor is something that allows us to go places we wouldn't otherwise go without it. And you're far more eloquent. And I'm sure you had a great question based around that. But that was the part that stuck with me. And I jotted it down because I was like, that's a really good, we should break that open and talk a little bit about that. And I was hoping I could tee you up to kind of elaborate on what your thought process was and see what we think about that concept. Oh, I just I mean, I think it's echoed in the things everybody's been talking about. But the thing that kind of in terms of the experiential piece of it, John talking about the relief that comes from the dislike when the tension disappears. And I think that relief is so powerful because we really, we really need that. We really need that. Even if the tension isn't specific, the joke brings it to something specific and then gives us that kind of relief. And it makes me think about actually Emily Nagoski's work on she wrote a book called Burnout. And what's cool is she talks about the stress cycle and how the telling the story and the gathering. And I'm realizing that the humor piece of that is probably a critical, like you said, evolutionary biological mechanism where it's like, what do you do with all of that in the body? It needs to go somewhere. And this is a great way to release it. And what we were talking about, Matt, with that was this idea of.
I feel like the, um, whether it's self-effacing humor or humor to kind of level the playing field with people, the idea that it's safe to go places that wouldn't feel safe. If you can go there with a lightness of spirit, I feel like that's where humor is an incredible skill. You can talk about the truths that are hard to face without it. You can have the conversations with a partner or friends that you can't have without it. You can go inside the parts of yourself and face that stuff. It's like, if you have, if you have the ally of kind of humor with you, because then it's, it's like, I don't know what the metaphor would be for the darkness, what humor does, but it feels like you're not alone in it or it's not, um, it's not the kind of the end of everything. Yeah. I mean, laughter is a huge release and I'm sure there's been lots of, lots of medical studies and what it does in the body. But even if you're just talking about the way we talk about laughter, it's like laughing oneself to tears, peeing oneself laughing. It's all about, it's all about expulsion of feelings and energy and stress. And the fact that it is, as you point out, shared in a, in a space is a, is a consolation and a comforting feeling that you are not alone in sort of feeling and recognizing certain truths that may be a little bit hard to face up to. But I think that it is like, it's just a rehearsal and survival. Like a standup set is often just a series of stressful crises that are then relieved by a punchline and you survive each one and you all survive together. And I think that's part of the feeling of being a comedy audience. I mean, when you activate, I call it maybe the realm of play versus seriousness. When you activate play, suddenly you can talk about anything at all. Many of which would be, you know, maybe it'd be really horrifying to imagine otherwise. And so, you're in this kind of imaginary worlds where, you know, things can happen. Like somebody can die a horrible death and it's hilarious. Or, and so, you can imagine all these different scenarios kind of safely. So, it almost opens up this whole ability to imagine things safely. Only the jester can tell the king.
This may be the return of mirth, perhaps. I don't know. It's a bit tough right now. Safely in the distance would be my recommendation. Go get some Burton Eye albums and contemplate what humor means to Maine. I live in Maine and that's all I can think about. And the funny thing is like, I my desire to be funny has really declined now that I unexpectedly have had, you know, have had children. They are grown. My genetic material is out there in the world. And I am in midlife contemplating my own mortality, my desire to be ha ha funny and get out on a stage and tell jokes is at zero level at this point. There's no reason for me to do it. But you know what? The beauty of the human death laughs at us all. Sorry. The human hero's journey, though, is perhaps in a couple of decades, humor will return to new and a totally different form to you because you don't care anymore. Well, that's true. I get old like George Burns. I guess that would be better than sitting in my garden like Thanos at the end of Infinity War, having killed half the people. I don't know. I'm not pretty content, exhausted, but I know that's the most subversive part of that movie, but that's another. I don't want to talk about Marvel movies. There might be other options too than those two. Maybe. No, those are the two I think. We've done extensive work on this. We've narrowed it down. Those are the two. Choose wisely. I've been working in my lab all afternoon. Exactly. I realized the other day that if I lived in Logan's Run, I would have been offed a really long time ago. And I found that hilarious. I love a Logan's Run reference. Boy, oh boy. I can tell her all of a certain.
That's for you, my old friend. I believe you would have renewed, I believe you would have renewed. Thank you. I echo those sentiments. There's part of you that still wants to live in a suburban Dallas mall where that was shot. Ah! Very comforting to me. No idea what you're talking about. Really, Ellen? Too young, too young. It's a science fiction movie. You'd be alive in the movie, but you're not old enough to know the film. Logan's Run, watch it, it's fantastic. Everybody's talking about Dune, but Logan's Run is in that canon. Okay. Okay. Yeah. A hundred percent. We're coming into the home stretch, which means that we're as close to a segment as we have on this show. And that is the part where I turn to Dr. Alan Cowan and ask if he's read anything interesting or has any knowledge pertaining to how the emotion of the day has been observed in the animal kingdom. Now, we talked a lot about the tickling mice. Previous episodes have revealed, of course, my favorite, the capuchin monkeys who exchange currency for monkey pornography. But I'm wondering, outside of those previously discussed areas, talk to me about mirth with animals and some of the parallels. We've already talked about play fighting and things of that nature. What was probably the most surprising discovery for you as someone, a self-professed lover of these animal studies that reads them all the time? What was something that really amused you in reviewing all this information, Alan? Well, I've talked a lot about a lot of different animal studies. I think one of the things is probably something that you might have seen, which is, and this is not a scientific study, but an observation. And I think it was either Blue Planet or Blue Planet 2, where they discover that the dolphins have a game that they play with like a rock or a piece of coral. I can't remember where they kind of go up. If you haven't seen this, you should definitely watch it. And then they drop it. And then they kind of spin around it for a while. And they all kind of make little noises. I think that that is play. And what they're doing seems a lot like laughter. Although a lot of what dolphins do seems a lot like laughter. So maybe that's a bit of a stretch. But I think that there's something there yet to be discovered. You see kind of similar behaviors and other really, really intelligent mammals, elephants and apes.
And a lot of this is hard to study because you don't really, even with humans, you don't really know what it is that's funny. Like one of the things that I saw an elephant once in New York, at an open mic in 2003, had a really incredible tight five minutes on the tech bubble. And the TV show that Emeril Lagasse made and the material, you can't perform it anymore. It doesn't hold up, but it wasn't really amazing. Yeah. There's some, you know, there's examples like that. There's this video of the orangutan that they're showing it like a magic trick and it just starts basically laughing hysterically. That's another one to look up. Orangutan laughing hysterically. That's the extent to which I can... Any video that does a magic trick for an animal is one of the things that brings me great joy and quite quickly as well. It's a very quick, hey, if I know I need something to pick me up, it's animals reacting to magic tricks. It's wonderful. Yes. That one is probably my favorite. I mean, the orangutan just starts laughing and like falling over, literally falling out of its chair. So, I think that you see actual examples of humor and mirth in the animal kingdom, even aside from play fighting, which is like the most basic. And then sort of like play chasing. Dogs do that too. And pretty much every animal that you interact with, if you play fight with it, this mouse or a dog, I shouldn't say animal, any mammal, it's probably going to... Well, if you're friendly with it, enjoy it in some way. But you can pick up a video of almost any mammal being played with. I'm going to guarantee you those dolphins are playing because I've been in a boat when I would see a porpoise come up for air for a second and then go back into the dark, cold, deep waters of Maine. That's a ruinously boring life. You got to have some games. I mean, what are you doing all day, dolphins? You're just swimming around, talking to each other.
And if you're learning your complex language and then trying to eat fish all the time, you've got to come up with some other stuff. Their brains are too big. They've got to be playing games. They've got to have amusement. That's how they survive. That's the euchre of the ocean. Yeah, the euchre of the ocean. My goodness, Danielle. Yeah. I thought Logan's run was going to be the most obscure reference. He keeps whittling it down. Wow. There's Skittles. Not the candy. The game. The British parlor game. Yeah. She's going to keep narrowing the audience until John, she's just making jokes about things in your room. It's just going to be- Well, that's the thing. Jokes are... Yeah. I mean, jokes are also how you find your people in the world. It is a social signal like, here's what I know about, here's what I think is funny. Maybe you know some of the same TV shows and or share some of the same values. Exactly. Exactly. We have friends where that is the full extent of our relationship. As we discuss the same TV shows and things that we enjoy, we do that once every couple of weeks. We've done that for years and we're totally content with that. That's what our relationship is. We enjoy the same things. We talk about those things. We go back to our lives and live separate worlds. But that's totally great. We enjoy each other for that. And that's- Yeah. Just make it a podcast and monetize it. Right? That's the step we're missing. That's where the big podcasts are. A couple of guys talking about Laverne and Shirley or whatever. Episode by episode. Yeah. Oh, man. If you did a Laverne and Shirley episode by episode podcast, top of the charts. How are there not 30 of those already? There have to be. There probably are. There have to be. There probably are. There have to be. Look, I was the idiot who proposed to my network that I do a episode by episode rewatch of iPodius. Excuse me. I was a jerk who suggested to my network that I do an episode by episode rewatch podcast of iClaudius. We called it iPodius. Got it. Okay. Go check it out, please. Check it out of the Maximum Fun Network where Judge John Hodgman resides as well. That's my plug. Perfect. Perfect. And great timing. It's the time for the plugs. But real quick, Alan, thank you again for indulging my animal questions. Especially coming out of our horroring and anxiety episodes, I was excited for something that was just-
playing the role of a playful and joyous and that was exactly what you gave me. So thank you for that. I almost talked about orcas torturing animals for fun. But, you know, I'm not going to go there now. We were different. Are you going to make me wait for the orcas torturing dolphins? Sorry, it's not orcas are no fun. Orcas are sadistic. Yeah, they're not funny. They're not funny animals, but they do play with their food. Responsible for a majority of the work out of the 1820s. And orcas were writing a lot of those orcas deserve whatever they have come into them. They're damn straight. They're truly, you know, they're truly the jerks of the toothed whales. Look, I've said it before in this show, and I'll say it again, this podcast is decidedly anti orca. OK, we know they're mean. We know they're evil. That's all I'm saying. They're smart. They're evil. They're cruel. We're cruel to them, too. We could. You know what? Ask a right whale. I think they'd say the orcas have had it pretty easy. If any whale species needs to laugh, it's the right whale. Boy, oh boy. And there's a podcast all about that. The right whales time has come and you should check it out. Pretty much it has time. I think there are only about 200 left. You know why they're called the right whale? Because they were the right whale to hunt. Yes, there are. There aren't many left. True. That's a bummer of a reason. Yeah. I read the main newspapers. There's a lot of coverage in there. Yeah. There's a lot. It's a big argument about how to protect the remaining population of the right whale without interfering with a lobster fishing industry. I can't tell. You make up the podcast as part of your profession, so I can't tell it's true. Yeah, listen to my podcast. No, it's absolutely true. I don't think it sounds like a matter for Judge John. Yeah. Amanda got earlier before you said it was because you've had children and you've lived there that you've no longer felt the need to be a comedian. I thought you were going to say it's because you moved to Maine, is that you no longer felt the need to be funny or be a comedian. No, Maine has its own style of humor, but I just went there to disappear into the woods. Beautiful. And genuinely think about right whales. From what I hear, it's the perfect place for that. It's the right place to hunt a right whale.
All right. Thank you so much. I don't know how to really, you know, on behalf of myself and my co-hosts here, I must extend an absurd amount of gratitude to you, sir, Mr. John Hodgman, for taking time out of your schedule to hang out with us. It means a lot that you were here today and shared your stories and perspective. Thank you. It was really great to speak to you all. Thank you for having me. You can hear me on the Judge John Hodgman podcast of maximumfund.org. If you want to hear more about my thoughts about Maine, you can buy my book Vacationland or take it out of the library or its follow-up book of funny stories called Medallion Status. I also co-created an animated show on Hulu with my friend David Rees, which is a very, very funny PG-13 show full of heart and mirth. And it is called Dicktown. We called it Dicktown. That's what we decided to call it. I don't want to try to explain it. Bit.ly slash Dicktown. Please check it out. It's a labor of love and it is mirth. Fantastic. Again, thank you to Alan and Danielle for also making time to join me on today's episode. And of course, a big thank you to you, person listening to all of this or watching, however you're consuming. If you really enjoyed today's episode, we got a bunch more you should check out. And hey, while you're at it, why not tell a friend or two about us as well? Throw us a five-star review if you're feeling really generous. I don't know how long this podcast can go on with just this one listener. I think you should try to double the audience at least. But this person has been so loyal, John. Nothing against this person. They've showed up every time. And to that, I thank you, mom, because without you, really, what are we doing here? We'll be back next week. But in the meantime, if you have any questions whatsoever that you'd like answered, feel free to email us at TheFeelingsLab at Hume.ai. I'll put it down here. T-H-E-F-E-E-L-I-N-G-S-L-A-B at Hume.ai. Send us any question you got. Farewell for now from all of us here at The Feelings Lab. I'm Matt Forte. Thanks again, everybody. Stay safe out there.
www.feelingslab.com
